IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 1
IBD CLINICAL
KNOWLEDGE RULEBOOK
AI Model Training Edition
15
Guidelines Extracted
667
Clinical Rules Captured
2019
to 2025 Publication Range
Source: IBD-Guidelines.pdf
Societies: ECCO, ACG, IOIBD, APMA, CCFI
Purpose: Structured clinical rules for AI/LLM ingestion
Citation format: Vancouver (first author et al.)
All recommendations include evidence level / GRADE strength where available

-- 1 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. European Crohn's and Colitis Guidelines on Sexuality, Fertility, Pregnancy, and Lactation
Torres J et al. J Crohns Colitis. 2023;17(1):1-27. doi:10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjac115
Rules: 36 | Knowledge base - Society guidelines / 1. ECCO_IBD and Fertility etc.pdf
2. ACG Clinical Guideline Update: Ulcerative Colitis in Adults
Rubin DT et al. Am J Gastroenterol. 2025;120(6):1187-1224. doi:10.14309/ajg.0000000000003463
Rules: 145 | Knowledge base - Society guidelines / 10. ACG_clinical_guideline_update__ulcerative_colitis.13.pdf
3. ACG Clinical Guideline: Management of Crohn's Disease in Adults
Lichtenstein GR et al. Am J Gastroenterol. 2025;120(6):1225-1264. doi:10.14309/ajg.0000000000003465
Rules: 80 | Knowledge base - Society guidelines / 11. ACG_clinical_guideline__management_of_crohn_s.pdf
4. STRIDE-II: Selecting Therapeutic Targets in Inflammatory Bowel Disease - Update
Turner D et al. Gastroenterology. 2021;161(5):1551-1569. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2021.06.051
Rules: 13 | Knowledge base - Society guidelines / 15. STRIDE consensus.pdf
5. Diet and Inflammatory Bowel Disease: The Asian Working Group Guidelines
Sood A et al. Indian J Gastroenterol. 2019;38(3):220-246. doi:10.1007/s12664-019-00976-1
Rules: 59 | Knowledge base - Society guidelines / 2. Diet in IBD _Asian working group.pdf
6. ECCO Guidelines on Therapeutics in Crohn's Disease: Medical Treatment
Gordon H et al. J Crohns Colitis. 2024;18(10):1531-1555. doi:10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjae091
Rules: 31 | Knowledge base - Society guidelines / 3. ECCO and Crohns.pdf
7. ACG Clinical Guideline Update: Preventive Care in Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Farraye FA et al. Am J Gastroenterol. 2025;120(7):1447-1473. doi:10.14309/ajg.0000000000003541
Rules: 21 | Knowledge base - Society guidelines / 4. acg_clinical_guideline_update__preventive_care_in.15.pdf
8. ECCO Guidelines on Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Malignancies
Gordon H et al. J Crohns Colitis. 2023;17(6):827-854. doi:10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjac187
Rules: 55 | Knowledge base - Society guidelines / 5. ECCO_IBD and malignancies.pdf
9. ECCO Guidelines on Therapeutics in Ulcerative Colitis: Medical Treatment
Raine T et al. J Crohns Colitis. 2022;16(1):2-17. doi:10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjab178
Rules: 19 | Knowledge base - Society guidelines / 6. ECCO_UC and medical treatment.pdf
10. ACG Clinical Guideline Update: Preventive Care in IBD - Summary Chart
Farraye FA et al. Am J Gastroenterol. 2025;120(7):1447-1473. doi:10.14309/ajg.0000000000003541
Rules: 5 | Knowledge base - Society guidelines / 7. ACG_Preventive care chart.pdf
11. ECCO Guidelines on the Prevention, Diagnosis, and Management of Infections in Inflammatory Bowel
Disease
Kucharzik T et al. J Crohns Colitis. 2021;15(6):879-913. doi:10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjab052
Rules: 51 | Knowledge base - Society guidelines / 8. ECCO_IBD and infections.pdf
12. ECCO Consensus on Management of Inflammatory Bowel Disease in Low- and Middle-Income Countries
El-Hussuna A et al. J Crohns Colitis. 2025. doi:10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjaf125
Rules: 37 | Knowledge base - Society guidelines / 9. ECCO_IBD in low and middle income countries.pdf
13. Optimizing 5-Aminosalicylate for Moderate Ulcerative Colitis: Expert Recommendations from the
Asia-Pacific, Middle East, and Africa IBD Coalition
Akyuz F et al. Intest Res. 2024. doi:10.5217/ir.2024.00089
Rules: 14 | Knowledge base - Medication guidelines / 12. APMA_Moderate UC_Int research 2024.pdf
14. Colitis and Crohn's Foundation (India) Consensus Statements on Use of 5-Aminosalicylic Acid in
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Sood A et al. Intest Res. 2020;18(4):355-378. doi:10.5217/ir.2019.09176
Rules: 58 | Knowledge base - Medication guidelines / 13. Indian Consensus statement on 5ASA.pdf

-- 2 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 3
15. Use of Thiopurines in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: An Update
Singh A et al. Intest Res. 2021;19(3):269-285. doi:10.5217/ir.2020.00155
Rules: 43 | Knowledge base - Medication guidelines / 14. Thiopurines_Arshadeep, Peddi et al..pdf

-- 3 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 4
KNOWLEDGE BASE - SOCIETY GUIDELINES
European Crohn's and Colitis Guidelines on Sexuality, Fertility, Pregnancy, and
Lactation
File: 1. ECCO_IBD and Fertility etc.pdf
Torres J et al. J Crohns Colitis. 2023;17(1):1-27. doi:10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjac115
36 rules extracted
Statement 1
In patients with IBD there is an increased risk of sexual dysfunction, particularly in females and in those with active
disease or perianal disease [EL3]
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 2
The efficacy of oral contraceptives does not seem to be reduced in women with IBD [EL5]. Oral contraceptives do
not seem to be associated with increased probability of IBD flares [EL2]. Oral contraceptives are generally low-risk in
women with IBD; nevertheless, a careful assessment of thrombotic risk is recommended before prescription[EL5]
Evidence: [EL5], [EL2], [EL5]
Statement 4
Pre-conception counselling in IBD is associated with improved pregnancy outcomes [EL3]. Individuals with IBD who
are planning pregnancy should undergo prepregnancy counselling to address parental concerns, to aim for disease
remission, and to discuss medication use during pregnancy [EL5]
Evidence: [EL3], [EL5]
Statement 5
Patients with IBD, particularly with CD, are more likely to choose voluntary childlessness than healthy controls [EL2].
Lack of pregnancy-specific IBD knowledge may impact on voluntary childlessness. Therefore, appropriate education
on pregnancy and family planning for all patients with IBD of childbearing age is recommended[EL5]
Evidence: [EL2], [EL5]
Statement 3
Two studies have directly addressed the impact of preconception care on pregnancy-related outcomes. One study in
IBD patients compared outcomes in 155 patients with an active pregnancy desire, who were referred to a dedicated
IBD pre-conception clinic, with 162 patients who attended the clinic only after they became pregnant. Counselling
improved medication compliance and smoking cessation, reduced flares during pregnancy, and lowered the risk of
delivering a LBW infant.56 Another study reported outcomes from a multidisciplinary, single-centre clinic created to
manage women with IBD and their neonates [‘IBD MOM’ clinic]. Patients with severe IBD were more likely to be
referred to the clinic. Outcomes of 90 women who attended the clinic were compared with 206 IBD patients who
attended community clinics and 61 689 controls. Pregnant women with moderate or severe IBD, who attended the
‘IBD MOM’ clinic, achieved similar perinatal outcomes as women with milder forms of IBD and were comparable to
the general population regarding pregnancy complications, birthweight, and caesarean section [C-section] rates, but
had significantly higher rates of preterm delivery, likely attributable to disease severity.57 Based on these studies,
early referral to specialist centres with a multidisciplinary team [including IBD physicians, maternal-fetal medical
specialists, psychologists, and colorectal surgeons] should be considered.
Statement 6
Active disease is associated with decreased fertility in women with IBD [EL3]. Achieving clinical remission may
increase the probabilityof successful conception. Active disease is also associated with decreased fertility in men
with IBD [EL4]
Evidence: [EL3], [EL4]

-- 4 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 5
Statement 7
Most of the commonly used IBD drugs have no demonstrated impact on fertility, in particular sperm quality [EL4].
Sulphasalazine is associated with reversible oligospermia and asthenozoospermia [EL2]
Evidence: [EL4], [EL2]
Statement 8
IBD-related pelvic surgeries lead to decreased fertilityand fecundityrates in women [EL2]. Laparoscopic surgical
approaches may lower the risk of infertility [EL2]
Evidence: [EL2], [EL2]
Statement 9
In women who have had restorative proctocolectomy with IPAA for UC, IVF procedures are three times more likely
than in women without restorative proctocolectomy. However, both groups have a similar probability of having a live
birth after IVF [EL3]
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 10
Pregnancy may increase the risk of relapse or worsening disease in patients with UC and complications in patients
with CD, specially if disease is active at conception [EL3]. IBD remission before conception is recommended [EL2]
Evidence: [EL3], [EL2]
Statement 11
Faecal calprotectin can reliably monitor disease activity during pregnancy [EL2]. Some blood parameters, such as
haemoglobin and CRP, are affected by pregnancy and may not be reliable, although trends can be helpful [EL5]
Evidence: [EL2], [EL5]
Statement 12
During pregnancy, endoscopy can be performed when needed to guide clinical decision making [EL3]. Capsule
endoscopy during pregnancy is considered a contraindication [EL5]. Ultrasonography [EL4] and MRI without the use
of gadolinium [EL4] are radiation-free and are recommended instead of a CT scan [EL5]
Evidence: [EL3], [EL5], [EL4], [EL4], [EL5]
Statement 13
Pregnancy and IBD increase the risk of VTE events [EL2]. VTE risk assessment should be performed before
conception and during pregnancy, especially in patients with active disease [EL5]. LMWH is recommended after
C-section, during hospital admission for disease flares, or when other risk factors of VTE are present [EL5]
Evidence: [EL2], [EL5], [EL5]
Statement 14
A multidisciplinary team that includes an experienced gastroenterologist, obstetrician, and surgeon may be valuable
in helping to optimise outcomes in pregnant women with a disease flare [EL5]. The choice of therapy for a flare
during pregnancy should consider the severity of disease activity and the gestational age [EL5]
Evidence: [EL5], [EL5]
Statement 15
Pregnant women experiencing a flare should be managed according to current guidelines for non-pregnant patients,
with 5-ASA, steroids, ciclosporin, anti-TNF agents [EL4], ustekinumab, or vedolizumab [EL5]. Initiating monotherapy
with a thiopurine is generally not recommended due to the slow onset of action and the potential risk of adverse
events [EL5]. Currently, JAK inhibitors and S1P receptor modulators should be avoided during pregnancy [EL5]
Evidence: [EL4], [EL5], [EL5], [EL5]

-- 5 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 6
Statement 16
In case of a flare beyond gestational week 37, early delivery could be considered prior to initiation of medical therapy
[EL5]
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 17
Indications for surgery in pregnant women with IBD are the same as for non-pregnant patients [EL5]. The indication
for IBD-related surgery during pregnancy should be determined promptly, based on IBD severity and general
maternal conditions. Urgent surgery should be performed if clinically indicated, regardless of the gestational age
[EL5]. The surgical management should be discussed in a multidisciplinary team involving gastroenterologists,
colorectal surgeons, obstetricians, and neonatal specialists, as required [EL5]
Evidence: [EL5], [EL5], [EL5]
Statement 18
Patients on thiopurine monotherapy can continue treatment throughout pregnancy [EL5]. When thiopurines are used
as combination therapy with biologics, thiopurine discontinuation may be considered on an individual basis if the
patient is in long-term remission [EL5]. Demonstration of adequate serum anti-TNF levels may be helpful in this
setting [EL5]
Evidence: [EL5], [EL5], [EL5]
Statement 19
For women with active disease just before or during pregnancy, or with disease that is difficult to control,
continuation of anti-TNF [EL3] or non-TNF biologics [EL5] throughout pregnancy is recommended. The last dose of
anti-TNF in the third trimester should be timed in accordance with the presumed due date to reduce foetal exposure
[EL5]
Evidence: [EL3], [EL5], [EL5]
Statement 20
For women in remission, discontinuing anti-TNF prior to the third trimester is not recommended, as it may increase
the risk of relapse [EL3] and lead to unfavourable pregnancy outcomes [EL3]. However, if a pregnant patient in
long-term remission wishes to discontinue anti-TNF prior to the third trimester, resumption of anti-TNF shortly after
delivery is recommended [EL5]
Evidence: [EL3], [EL3], [EL5]
Statement 21
For women in remission treated with non-TNF biologic agents [ustekinumab, vedolizumab], an individualised -
decision on discontinuing treatment should be made, considering the risk of relapse and the limited data on the
consequences of fetal exposure [EL5]
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 22
Pregnant women with IBD seem to have a higher risk of gestational diabetes, stillbirth, preterm pre-labour rupture of
membranes, preterm delivery, small for gestational age, and low birthweight newborns [EL2]. Disease activity during
pregnancy is a risk factor, as it is associated with preterm pre-labour rupture of membranes, preterm birth, and low
birthweight in IBD pregnant women. Disease activity during pregnancy also increases the risk of stillbirth and low
Apgar score in CD [EL3]
Evidence: [EL2], [EL3]
Statement 23
Most drugs used for the treatment of IBD are considered low-risk during pregnancy [EL3]
Evidence: [EL3]

-- 6 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 7
Statement 24
ASA is regarded as low-risk during pregnancy [EL3]
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 25
Although short-term corticosteroids, including budesonide, can in general be regarded as low-risk during pregnancy
for managing flares, the risk of maternal-fetal complications should be considered [EL3]
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 26
In case of perianal or abdominal sepsis or pouchitis, metronidazole and ciprofloxacin can be administered in patients
with IBD during pregnancy. However, given the risk of arthropathies in children, ciprofloxacin should be avoided if
possible during the first trimester of pregnancy [EL4]
Evidence: [EL4]
Statement 28
Anti-TNF antibodies are regarded as low-risk during pregnancy [EL3]. Data for vedolizumab and ustekinumab are
limited, but no increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes has been identified [EL4]
Evidence: [EL3], [EL4]
Statement 27
Thiopurines are not associated with significant neonatal adverse outcomes in pregnant patients with IBD [EL3].
Methotrexate [EL3], thalidomide [EL3], JAK inhibitors, and ozanimod are contraindicated during pregnancy [EL5].
Data for ciclosporin and tacrolimus in patients with IBD during pregnancy are limited
Evidence: [EL3], [EL3], [EL3], [EL5]
Statement 29
The mode of delivery does not seem to influence outcome of patients with IBD regarding development or worsening
of inactive perianal disease [EL2] and anal sphincter damage [EL2]
Evidence: [EL2], [EL2]
Statement 30
Mode of delivery should be guided by obstetric considerations. In patients with active perianal disease, prior
rectovaginal fistula, and after restorative proctocolectomy, C-section is recommended after multidisciplinary
discussion involving gastroenterologists, obstetricians, and IBD surgeons [EL5]
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 31
The risk of serious infections requiring hospital admission in the first 5 years of life does not seem to be increased in
children exposed to anti-TNF agents or thiopurines during pregnancy [EL4]. However, there are no data beyond 5
years of follow-up on the effect of in utero exposure of IBD drugs on the developing immune system and
neurodevelopment [EL4]. Safety data on children exposed to vedolizumab, ustekinumab, and tofacitinib are limited
[EL5]
Evidence: [EL4], [EL4], [EL5]
Statement 32
There is no increased risk of postpartum relapse in patients with CD compared with non-pregnant patients with CD.
In UC, there may be an increased risk of relapse postpartum [EL3]
Evidence: [EL3]

-- 7 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 8
Statement 33
For patients who continue biologics during the entire pregnancy, the treatment should be continued uninterrupted in
the postpartum phase unless there is a contraindication to their use [EL5]. For patients who interrupted treatment
during pregnancy, the treatment should be resumed after delivery as soon as possible [EL5]. Re-induction or
continuation of previous maintenance therapy is dependent on clinical circumstances [EL5]
Evidence: [EL5], [EL5], [EL5]
Statement 34
Inactivated vaccines are recommended according to national guidelines. In children exposed in utero to biologics,
live attenuated vaccines should be withheld within the first year of life or until the biologic is no longer detectable in
the infant’s blood [EL3]
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 35
Drugs that are considered low-risk during pregnancy are also considered low-risk during breastfeeding and thus can
be continued [EL3]
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 36
Breastfeeding does not seem to influence disease activity of patients with IBD [EL4]
Evidence: [EL4]

-- 8 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 9
KNOWLEDGE BASE - SOCIETY GUIDELINES
ACG Clinical Guideline Update: Ulcerative Colitis in Adults
File: 10. ACG_clinical_guideline_update__ulcerative_colitis.13.pdf
Rubin DT et al. Am J Gastroenterol. 2025;120(6):1187-1224. doi:10.14309/ajg.0000000000003463
145 rules extracted
Key Concept 1
UC should be suspected in patients presenting with hematochezia, increased stool frequency, or bowel urgency.
Infectious aetiologies must be excluded at the time of initial diagnosis.
Key Concept 2
Colonoscopy with ileal intubation and biopsy from multiple segments (including the terminal ileum) is required to
confirm the diagnosis of UC. Review by a pathologist with gastrointestinal expertise is preferred.
Key Concept 3
Disease extent categories in UC: (i) Proctitis — inflammation within 18 cm of the anal verge; (ii) Left-sided colitis —
inflammation from the sigmoid colon to the splenic flexure; (iii) Extensive colitis — inflammation beyond the splenic
flexure (includes pancolitis).
Key Concept 4
If the terminal ileum is normal on colonoscopy: no upper endoscopy or small-bowel imaging is required unless
clinical findings otherwise suggest Crohn's disease.
Key Concept 5
Endoscopic severity must be reported using a validated scoring scale: the Mayo Endoscopic Score (MES) or the
Ulcerative Colitis Endoscopic Index of Severity (UCEIS).
Key Concept 6
Disease monitoring may use fecal calprotectin (FC), C-reactive protein (CRP), flexible sigmoidoscopy or
colonoscopy, or intestinal ultrasound. Select the monitoring modality based on clinical context, disease extent, and
patient preference.
Key Concept 7
Patients with mildly-to-moderately active UC who have poor prognostic factors should be treated with therapies
appropriate for moderate-to-severe disease. Poor prognostic factors include: extensive colitis, deep ulcers, elevated
CRP or FC, prior hospitalization, young age at diagnosis, and need for corticosteroids at first flare.
Key Concept 8
Patients with mildly-to-moderately active UC should be formally reassessed at 8 weeks to determine response to
induction therapy. Adjust or escalate therapy based on clinical, biochemical, and endoscopic response.
Key Concept 9
There is insufficient evidence to recommend routine probiotics, prebiotics, or fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT)
as primary induction therapy in mild-to-moderate UC.
Key Concept 10
5-ASA therapy for maintenance is likely LESS effective in patients who previously had severely active UC compared
with those who had moderately active UC. Consider advanced therapy for maintenance after severe flares.

-- 9 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 10
Key Concept 11
Budesonide MMX has NOT been studied for maintenance of remission in moderate-to-severely active UC and
should not be used for this indication.
Key Concept 12
Most clinical trials demonstrate benefit from using the same agent that induced remission as the maintenance
therapy. Switching mechanism of action for maintenance without clinical justification is not recommended.
Key Concept 13
There is insufficient evidence supporting proactive therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) in ALL unselected UC patients
in remission. Reactive TDM (in response to loss of response) is recommended.
Key Concept 14
There is no evidence to recommend routine measurement of serum concentrations of vedolizumab, ustekinumab,
guselkumab, mirikizumab, or risankizumab. TDM for these agents remains investigational.
Key Concept 15
Obtain surgical consultation in patients with moderate-to-severe UC who are refractory or intolerant to medical
therapy. Surgical decision-making should involve a multidisciplinary team.
Key Concept 16 (Anti-TNF: TDM in non-response)
In UC patients who are non-responsive to anti-TNF therapy: assess trough drug levels and antibody formation to
identify the mechanism of non-response and guide the decision to optimise existing therapy versus switch to an
alternative mechanism.
Key Concept 17 (Anti-TNF: primary non-response)
PRIMARY non-responders to anti-TNF agents (lack of clinical benefit despite adequate serum drug levels) should be
evaluated for an alternative mechanism of action. Do NOT cycle to another anti-TNF agent within the same class in
primary non-responders.
Key Concept 18 (Biosimilars)
Biosimilars to anti-TNF agents and ustekinumab are acceptable alternatives to reference biologics. No delays in
switching are necessary; patients and clinicians should be notified of any biosimilar substitution.
Key Concept 19 (SC vs IV biologics)
Subcutaneous infliximab and subcutaneous vedolizumab are equivalent to IV maintenance dosing. Equivalence for
induction dosing or escalated doses has not been robustly established.
Key Concept 20 (No predictive biomarker)
There are currently no validated therapeutic biomarkers or companion diagnostic tests to predict treatment response
in active UC. Therapy selection is based on clinical factors, disease severity, and patient preference.
Key Concept 21 (Infliximab preferred anti-TNF)
Infliximab is the PREFERRED anti-TNF therapy for patients with moderate-to-severe UC, based on the largest
evidence base and established efficacy.
Key Concept 22 (Infection risk: vedolizumab or anti-IL-23)
Patients at higher risk for infectious complications may benefit from vedolizumab or anti-IL-23 agents (risankizumab,
guselkumab, mirikizumab) over more systemically immunosuppressive options such as anti-TNF or JAK inhibitors.

-- 10 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 11
Key Concept 23 (EIM-guided therapy selection)
Initial and subsequent therapies for moderate-to-severe UC may be chosen based on extraintestinal manifestations
(EIMs). Select therapies with demonstrated efficacy for both UC and the specific EIM (e.g., anti-TNF for peripheral
arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, pyoderma gangrenosum).
Key Concept 24 (First therapy higher response rates)
First-line therapies for UC have higher response and remission rates than therapies used after prior failure. Optimise
first-line therapy before escalating.
Key Concept 25 (Primary vs secondary non-response)
Distinguishing between primary non-response (inadequate benefit from start) and secondary non-response (loss of
initially adequate response) is critical for selecting the next therapy. Primary non-responders should switch
mechanism; secondary non-responders may benefit from dose optimisation or switching within the same class.
Key Concept 26 (ASUC: sigmoidoscopy timing)
Flexible sigmoidoscopy should be performed within 72 hours (preferably within 24 hours) of ASUC admission — to
assess endoscopic severity and obtain biopsies to exclude CMV colitis.
Key Concept 27 (ASUC: toxic megacolon)
Assess for toxic megacolon in ALL patients presenting with ASUC. Toxic megacolon criteria: colonic dilatation >6 cm
on plain radiograph plus systemic features (fever >38°C, HR >120 bpm, neutrophilia, anaemia, hypotension,
dehydration).
Key Concept 28 (ASUC: medications to avoid)
NSAIDs, narcotic analgesics, and anticholinergic agents should be AVOIDED in patients with ASUC — they can
precipitate or worsen toxic megacolon.
Key Concept 29 (ASUC: Day 3 reassessment)
If failing to adequately respond to IV corticosteroids by Day 3, OR if toxicity is suspected: obtain surgical consultation
and consider rescue therapy (infliximab or cyclosporine).
Key Concept 30 (ASUC: infliximab vs cyclosporine)
Choice between infliximab and cyclosporine for ASUC rescue therapy should be based on: provider experience with
each agent, history of prior failure of immunomodulator or anti-TNF therapy, and serum albumin level (low albumin
<2.5 g/dL favours infliximab with dose intensification).
Key Concept 31 (ASUC: surgery indications)
Absolute indications for surgery in ASUC: toxic megacolon, colonic perforation, severe refractory haemorrhage, and
refractoriness to all available medical therapy.
Key Concept 32 (ASUC: prior biologic not contraindication to surgery)
Infliximab and cyclosporine do NOT increase postoperative complications of colectomy. Surgery should NOT be
deferred in a patient requiring urgent colectomy based solely on prior or recent exposure to these agents.
Key Concept 33 (ASUC: IFX dose intensification)
In ASUC patients initiating infliximab rescue therapy: consider dose intensification (10 mg/kg) in patients with low
serum albumin (<2.5 g/dL) — due to increased drug clearance in severe inflammation and protein loss.
Key Concept 34 (ASUC: tofacitinib/upadacitinib insufficient data)
There are INSUFFICIENT DATA to routinely recommend tofacitinib or upadacitinib in ASUC failing to adequately
respond to IV corticosteroids or infliximab induction. These agents should not be used for this indication outside of
clinical trials.

-- 11 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 12
Recommendation 1
We recommend stool testing to rule out Clostridioides difficile in patients suspected of having UC. (Strong
recommendation, very low quality of evidence)
Recommendation 2
We recommend against serologic antibody testing to establish or rule out a diagnosis of UC. (Strong
recommendation, very low quality of evidence)
Recommendation 3
We recommend against serologic antibody testing to determine the prognosis of UC. (Strong recommendation, very
low quality of evidence)
Key Concept 1
The diagnosis of UC should be suspected in patients with hematochezia, increased stool frequency, or bowel
urgency.
Key Concept 2
Infectious etiologies should be excluded at the time of diagnosis.
Key Concept 3
Colonoscopy with intubation of the ileum and biopsies of affected and unaffected areas should be obtained to
confirm the diagnosis of UC, with mucosal biopsies interpreted by a pathologist, preferably one with expertise in
gastrointestinal pathology.
Key Concept 4
Categories of disease extent include (i) proctitis (within 18 cm of anal verge, distal to rectosigmoid junction), (ii)
left-sided colitis (extending from sigmoid to splenic flexure), (iii) extensive colitis (beyond splenic flexure which
includes those with involvement of the entire colorectum [pancolitis]).
Key Concept 5
If the terminal ileum is normal, further evaluation of the stomach and small bowel by upper endoscopy and
cross-sectional imaging is not needed unless there are other symptoms or findings to suggest proximal
gastrointestinal involvement or a diagnosis of CD rather than UC.
Key Concept 6
Definitions of disease severity are needed to guide treatment decisions; definitions should be based on (i)
patient-reported outcomes (bleeding, normalization of bowel habits, bowel urgency), (ii) the inflammatory burden
(endoscopic assessment including extent and severity, and markers of inflammation including fecal calprotectin
[FC], C-reactive protein [CRP], and serum albumin), (iii) disease course (need for hospitalization, need for steroids,
failure to respond to medications), and (iv) disease impact (HRQoL and social functioning).
Key Concept 7
Endoscopic severity should be reported using a validated endoscopic scale such as the Mayo Endoscopic Score
(MES) or the UC Endoscopic Index of Severity (UCEIS).
Key Concept 8
Disease assessment and monitoring in response to therapy and during maintenance and periods of suspected
relapse may be performed with FC, CRP, endoscopic assessment with flexible sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy,
and/or intestinal ultrasound.

-- 12 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 13
Recommendation 4
We recommend treating patients with UC to achieve endoscopic improvement (defined as resolution of inflammatory
changes [MES 0 or 1]) to increase the likelihood of sustained steroid-free remission and to prevent hospitalizations
and surgery. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Recommendation 5
We recommend the use of FC in UC to assess response to therapy, to evaluate suspected relapse, and during
maintenance. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Key Concept 9
UC is a chronic condition for which therapy is required to induce and maintain remission, therapeutic decisions
should be categorized into those for (i) induction and (ii) maintenance, with goals of obtaining and maintaining a
steroid-free remission and obtaining biological response through reduction in biomarkers or endoscopic
improvement.
Key Concept 10
Strategies for management of UC should reflect the patient’s and provider’s goals and recognize the chronic nature
of the disease.
Key Concept 11
Symptomatic remission relates to improvement in PROs while endoscopic healing is defined as restoration of intact
mucosa without friability. Deep remission is a combination of symptomatic remission and endoscopic healing and is
a preferred goal of management. Corticosteroid-free remission is defined based on symptoms and endoscopic
findings without corticosteroid use for a sustained period of time (usually more than 12 weeks).
Key Concept 12
Initial treatment of UC should focus on restoration of normal bowel frequency and control of the primary symptoms of
bleeding and bowel urgency. An endoscopically healed mucosa is associated with sustained remission and reduced
risk of colectomy.
Key Concept 13
Histologic remission is associated with some improved clinical outcomes but has not yet been validated
prospectively as a preferred target for treatment.
Key Concept 14
Control of mucosal inflammation may reduce dysplasia risk.
Key Concept 15
Given the chronic nature of UC and the therapies for UC, monitoring for disease-related and drug-related
complications is important. This should incorporate preventive strategies as outlined here and in a separate
guideline from the ACG (100).
Key Concept 16
Routine visits are recommended to monitor for relapse and address health maintenance needs.
Key Concept 17
Patients with UC should be screened for coexistent anxiety and depressive disorders, and when identified, patients
should be provided with resources to address these conditions.
Recommendation 6
In patients with mildly to moderately active ulcerative proctitis, we recommend rectal 5-aminosalicylate acid (5-ASA)
therapies at a dose of 1 g/daily for induction of remission. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence)

-- 13 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 14
Recommendation 7
For patients with mildly to moderately active proctitis not responsive to topical 5-ASA, we suggest tacrolimus
suppository or beclomethasone suppository over no treatment. (Conditional recommendation, low quality of
evidence)
Recommendation 8
For patients with mildly to moderately active proctitis or left-sided colitis, we suggest use of topical corticosteroids
(suppository, foam, enema), over no treatment. (Conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence)
Recommendation 9
In patients with mildly to moderately active proctitis or left sided colitis, we recommend rectal 5-ASA enemas at a
dose of at least 1 g/daily preferred over rectal steroids for induction of remission. (Strong recommendation,
moderate quality of evidence)
Recommendation 10
In patients with mildly to moderately active left-sided UC, we suggest rectal 5ASA enemas at a dose of at least 1
g/daily combined with oral 5-ASA at a dose of at least 2.0 g/daily compared with oral 5-ASA therapy alone for
induction of remission. (Conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence)
Recommendation 11
In patients with mildly to moderately active left-sided UC, who are intolerant or nonresponsive to oral and rectal
5-ASA at appropriate doses (oral at least 2.0 g daily and rectal at least 1 g daily), we recommend oral budesonide
Multi Matrix System (MMX) 9 mg/d for induction of remission. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of
evidence)
Recommendation 12
In patients with mildly to moderately active extensive colitis, oral 5-ASA at a dose of at least 2.0 g daily is
recommended to induce remission. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Recommendation 13
In patients with UC of any extent who fail to respond to 5-ASA therapy, we recommend oral systemic corticosteroids
to induce remission. (Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence)
Recommendation 14
In patients with mildly to moderately active UC who fail to reach remission with appropriately dosed 5-ASA (at least
2–4.8 g daily oral mesalamine and/or at least 1 g daily rectal mesalamine), we suggest against changing to an
alternate 5-ASA formulation to induce remission. Alternative therapeutic classes should be considered. (Conditional
recommendation, low quality of evidence)
Recommendation 15
In patients with mildly active UC of any extent, we suggest using a low dose (2.0–2.4 g) of 5-ASA, in comparison
with a higher dose (4.8 g), because there is no difference in remission rate. (Conditional recommendation, very low
quality of evidence)
Recommendation 16
In patients with mildly to moderately active UC of any extent not responding to oral 5-ASA, we recommend the
addition of budesonide MMX 9 mg/d to induce remission. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Recommendation 17
In patients with mildly to moderately active UC of any extent using 5-ASA to induce remission, we recommend either
once daily or more frequently dosed oral 5-ASA based on patient preference to optimize adherence because
efficacy and safety are no different. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence)

-- 14 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 15
Recommendation 18
In patients with mildly active ulcerative proctitis, we recommend rectal 5-ASA at a dose of 1 g daily for maintenance
of remission. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Recommendation 19
In patients with mildly active left-sided or extensive UC, we recommend oral 5ASA therapy (at least 1.5 g/d) for
maintenance of remission. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Recommendation 20
We recommend against systemic, budesonide MMX, or topical corticosteroids for maintenance of remission in
patients with UC. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Key Concept 18
Patients with mildly to moderately active UC and a number of prognostic factors associated with an increased risk of
hospitalization or surgery should be treated with therapies for moderate-to-severe disease (Table 8). Each
prognostic factor carries a different weight and must be discussed in a shared decision-making fashion with the
patient. For example, age alone is a weaker prognostic factor than severe endoscopic activity. However, young age
combined with another factor may represent sufficient criteria to treat using therapies with proven efficacy in patients
with moderate-to-severe UC.
Key Concept 19
Patients with mildly to moderately active UC should be reassessed to determine response to induction therapy within
8 weeks.
Key Concept 20
There is not sufficient evidence for routine use of probiotics, prebiotics, or other alternative therapies as primary
induction therapy for patients with mildly to moderately active UC.
Key Concept 21
There is not sufficient evidence of an optimal approach to fecal microbial transfer as a primary induction treatment
for patients with mildly to moderately active UC.
Key Concept 22
Patients with previously mildly to moderately active UC who have achieved remission should be treated with
maintenance therapy with demonstrated efficacy in prevention of relapse.
Key Concept 23
In patients with previously mildly to moderately active UC who have achieved remission, there is insufficient
evidence to recommend the use of a probiotic as primary or adjunctive therapy for maintenance of remission.
Recommendation 21
In patients with moderately active UC, we recommend oral budesonide MMX for induction of remission. (Strong
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Recommendation 22
In patients with moderately to severely active UC of any extent, we recommend oral systemic corticosteroids to
induce remission. (Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence)
Recommendation 23
In patients with moderately to severely active UC, we recommend against monotherapy with thiopurines or
methotrexate for induction of remission. (Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence)

-- 15 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 16
Recommendation 24
In patients with moderately to severely active UC, we recommend sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) receptor
modulators, ozanimod and etrasimod, for induction of remission. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of
evidence)
Recommendation 25
In patients with moderately to severely active UC, we recommend the interleukin (IL)-12/23p40 antibody
ustekinumab for induction of remission. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Recommendation 26
In patients with moderately to severely active UC, we recommend the IL23p19 inhibitor guselkumab, mirikizumab, or
risankizumab for induction of remission. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Recommendation 27
In patients with moderately to severely active UC, we recommend vedolizumab for induction of remission. (Strong
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Recommendation 28
In patients with moderately to severely active UC, we recommend anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) therapy using
infliximab for induction of remission. (Strong recommendation, high quality of evidence)
Recommendation 29
In patients with moderately to severely active UC, we recommend anti-TNF therapy using adalimumab or golimumab
for induction of remission. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Recommendation 30
In patients with moderately to severely active UC, we recommend the Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor tofacitinib for
induction of remission. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Recommendation 31
In patients with moderately to severely active UC, we recommend the JAK inhibitor upadacitinib for induction of
remission. (Strong recommendation, high quality of evidence)
Recommendation 32
In patients with moderately to severely active UC who have failed 5-ASA therapy and in whom advanced therapies
with biologics or JAK inhibitors are used for induction of remission, we suggest against using 5-ASA for added
clinical efficacy. (Conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence)
Recommendation 33
When infliximab is used as induction therapy for patients with moderately to severely active UC, we recommend
combination therapy with a thiopurine. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence for azathioprine)
Key Concept 24
Patients with mildly to moderately active UC who are not responsive (or are intolerant) to 5-ASA therapies should be
treated as patients with moderate-to-severe disease.

-- 16 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 17
Key Concept 25
Strategies for the management of the nonhospitalized patient with moderately or severely active UC are similar with
the exception of a few considerations in which the data exist specifically for a patient with moderately active UC: a.
5-ASA therapy could be used as monotherapy for induction of moderately but not severely active UC. b. In patients
with moderately active UC, consider nonsystemic corticosteroids such as budesonide MMX before the use of
systemic steroid therapy. c. In patients with severely active UC, consider systemic corticosteroids rather than topical
corticosteroids. d. Corticosteroids may be avoided entirely when other effective induction strategies are planned.
Key Concept 26
The extent of bowel involvement in moderately to severely active UC should not limit the choice of advanced
therapies for these patients. This includes patients with moderately to severely active isolated proctitis who should
have access to and be treated with therapies with demonstrated efficacy in patients with more extensive UC of
similar activity.
Key Concept 27
Data on combination anti-TNF and immunomodulators in moderately to severely active UC only exist for infliximab
and thiopurines.
Key Concept 28
The patient with nonresponse or loss of response to anti-TNF therapy should be assessed with trough serum
concentrations of drug to identify the reason for lack of response and whether to optimize the existing therapy or to
select an alternate therapy.
Key Concept 29
Patients who are primary nonresponders to an anti-TNF (defined as lack of therapeutic benefit after induction and
despite sufficient serum drug concentrations) should be evaluated and considered for alternative mechanisms of
disease control (e.g., in a different class of therapy) rather than cycling to another drug within the anti-TNF class.
Key Concept 30
Biosimilars to anti-TNF therapies and to ustekinumab are acceptable substitutes for originator therapies. Delays in
switching should not occur and patients and clinicians should be notified about such changes.
Key Concept 31
Subcutaneous infliximab and vedolizumab are considered equivalent to the standard intravenous maintenance
dosing of these agents. The equivalence of the subcutaneous formulations for induction or as substitution for
escalated doses of these therapies has not been robustly established.
Key Concept 32
Obtain consultation with a surgeon and consider colectomy in patients with moderately to severely active UC who
are refractory or intolerant to medical therapy.
Recommendation 34
In patients with prior moderately to severely active UC who have achieved remission but previously failed 5-ASA
therapy and are now on anti-TNF therapy, we suggest against using concomitant 5-ASA for efficacy of maintenance
of remission (162). (Conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence)
Recommendation 35
In patients with prior moderately to severely active UC, we recommend against systemic corticosteroids for
maintenance of remission. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)

-- 17 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 18
Recommendation 36
For patients with prior moderately to severely active UC now in remission because of corticosteroid induction, we
suggest thiopurines for maintenance of remission as compared with no treatment or corticosteroids. (Conditional
recommendation, low quality of evidence)
Recommendation 37
In patients with prior moderately to severely active UC now in remission, we suggest against using methotrexate for
maintenance of remission. (Conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence)
Recommendation 38
We recommend continuing S1P receptor modulators ozanimod or etrasimod for maintenance of remission as
compared wih no treatment after induction of remission with these agents. (Strong recommendation, moderate
quality of evidence)
Recommendation 39
We recommend continuing ustekinumab for maintenance of remission as compared to no treatment in patients who
responded to the induction dose of this medication. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Recommendation 40
We recommend continuing guselkumab, mirikizumab, or risankizumab as compared with no treatment for
maintenance of remission in patients who respond to the induction dosing of the same treatment. (Strong
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Recommendation 41
We recommend continuing vedolizumab as compared with no treatment for maintenance of remission (intravenous
[IV] or subcutaneous [SC] dosing) in patients with prior moderately to severely active UC now in remission after
vedolizumab induction. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Recommendation 42
We recommend continuing anti-TNF therapy using adalimumab, golimumab, or infliximab (IV or SC dosing) for
maintenance of remission after anti-TNF induction in patients with prior moderately to severely active UC. (Strong
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Recommendation 43
We recommend continuing tofacitinib or upadacitinib as compared with no treatment for maintenance of remission in
patients with prior moderately to severely active UC now in remission after induction with tofacitinib or upadacitinib.
(Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Key Concept 33
5-ASA therapy for maintenance of remission is likely not as effective in prior severely active UC as compared with
prior moderately active UC (140).
Key Concept 34
Budesonide MMX has not been studied for maintenance of remission of prior moderately to severely active UC.
Key Concept 35
Most clinical trials and available data demonstrate a benefit of using the steroid-sparing therapy that induces
remission to maintain that remission.
Key Concept 36
There is insufficient evidence supporting a benefit for proactive therapeutic drug monitoring in all unselected patients
with UC in remission.

-- 18 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 19
Key Concept 37
There is insufficient evidence to recommend assessment of serum concentrations of vedolizumab, ustekinumab,
guselkumab, mirikizumab, or risankizumab.
Key Concept 38
Patients with moderately to severely active UC who do not maintain remission despite optimized medical therapy
should be considered for elective proctocolectomy.
Key Concept 39
A patient with moderately to severely active disease regardless of the extent of bowel involvement (including
isolated proctitis) should be treated with therapies that have demonstrated efficacy for the activity and severity of the
disease.
Recommendation 44
In patients with moderately to severely active UC who are responders to anti-TNF therapy and now losing response,
we suggest measuring serum drug levels and antidrug antibodies (if there is not sufficient drug present) to assess
reason for loss of response. (Conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence)
Recommendation 45
In patients with moderately to severely active UC, we recommend vedolizumab as compared with adalimumab for
induction and maintenance of remission. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Key Concept 40
There are no validated therapeutic biomarkers or companion diagnostic tests to enhance selection or predict
response to treatment for the patient with active UC.
Key Concept 41
Patients with UC should have available all medical options as recommended by their doctor and healthcare team.
Third-party payers and requirements for step therapy should not come between the patient and their healthcare
team in making decisions about treatment for UC.
Key Concept 42
Patients with moderately to severely active UC have higher rates of response and remission with their first therapies
than after failure of one or more other advanced therapies.
Key Concept 43
Given the expanding number of therapies per mechanistic class, a distinction between primary nonresponse and
secondary nonresponse is important to select the next therapeutic option.
Key Concept 44
Post hoc subgroup analyses and network meta-analyses provide hypothesis-generating data but are not sufficient to
stratify therapies for individual patients.
Key Concept 45
Infliximab is the preferred anti-TNF therapy for patients with moderately to severely active UC.
Key Concept 46
Some patients with moderately to severely active UC who are at higher risk for infectious complications may benefit
from vedolizumab or an anti-IL-23 strategy over more systemically immunosuppressive medical options.

-- 19 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 20
Key Concept 47
Initial and subsequent therapies for moderately to severely active UC may be chosen based on extraintestinal
manifestations, including the involvement of joints or skin, in which therapies which have efficacy in both UC and the
extraintestinal organ is known.
Recommendation 1
In patients with acute severe UC (ASUC), we recommend testing for CDI. (Strong recommendation, moderate
quality of evidence)
Recommendation 2
In patients with ASUC, we recommend pharmacologic DVT prophylaxis as compared with no prophylaxis to prevent
VTE. (Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence)
Recommendation 3
We recommend against routine use of broad-spectrum antibiotics in the management of ASUC. (Strong
recommendation, low quality of evidence)
Recommendation 4
We suggest against total parenteral nutrition for the purpose of bowel rest in ASUC. (Conditional recommendation,
very low quality of evidence)
Recommendation 5
In patients with ASUC, we recommend a total of 60 mg/d of methylprednisolone or hydrocortisone 100 mg 3 or 4
times per day to induce remission. (Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence)
Recommendation 6
In patients with ASUC failing to adequately respond to intravenous corticosteroids (IVCS) by 3 days, we recommend
medical rescue therapy with infliximab or cyclosporine. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
Recommendation 7
In patients with ASUC who achieve remission with infliximab treatment, we recommend maintenance of remission
with the same agent. (Strong recommendations, moderate quality of evidence)
Recommendation 8
In patients with ASUC who achieve remission with cyclosporine treatment, we suggest maintenance of remission
with thiopurines. (Conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence)
Recommendation 9
In patients with ASUC who achieve remission with cyclosporine treatment, we suggest maintenance of remission
with vedolizumab. (Conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence)
Key Concept 48
All patients with ASUC should undergo a flexible sigmoidoscopy within 72 hours and preferably within 24 hours of
admission. This should be used to assess endoscopic severity of inflammation and to obtain biopsies to evaluate for
cytomegalovirus (CMV) colitis.
Key Concept 49
All patients with ASUC should be assessed for the presence of toxic megacolon.

-- 20 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 21
Key Concept 50
Response in patients with acute severe UC should be monitored using stool frequency, rectal bleeding, physical
examination, vital signs, and serial CRP measurements.
Key Concept 51
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), narcotics, and medications with anticholinergic side effects should
be avoided in ASUC.
Key Concept 52
In patients with ASUC failing to adequately respond to medical therapy by 3 days or with suspected toxicity, surgical
consultation should be obtained.
Key Concept 53
In patients with ASUC, the choice between infliximab and cyclosporine should be based on provider experience with
the agent, history of prior failure of immunomodulator or anti-TNF therapy, and serum albumin.
Key Concept 54
Toxic megacolon, colonic perforation, severe refractory hemorrhage, and refractoriness to medical therapy are
indications for surgery in patients with ASUC.
Key Concept 55
Infliximab and cyclosporine do not increase postoperative complications of colectomy, and surgery should not be
deferred based on this exposure.
Key Concept 56
In patients with ASUC failing to adequately respond to IVCS by 3 days or to infliximab induction, there are
insufficient data to routinely recommend treatment with tofacitinib or upadacitinib.
Key Concept 57
In patients with ASUC initiating infliximab, dose intensification should be considered for those patients with low
serum albumin (,2.5 g/dL).

-- 21 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 22
KNOWLEDGE BASE - SOCIETY GUIDELINES
ACG Clinical Guideline: Management of Crohn's Disease in Adults
File: 11. ACG_clinical_guideline__management_of_crohn_s.pdf
Lichtenstein GR et al. Am J Gastroenterol. 2025;120(6):1225-1264. doi:10.14309/ajg.0000000000003465
80 rules extracted
Recommendation 39 (No maintenance in silent mild CD)
No maintenance treatment is an option for some patients with asymptomatic (silent), mild Crohn's disease. However,
routine monitoring is still required to identify disease progression — no treatment does not mean no follow-up.
(Conditional recommendation, very low quality evidence)
Recommendation 40 (Sulfasalazine for mild colonic CD only)
Sulfasalazine should only be considered for patients with symptomatic mild COLONIC Crohn's disease.
Sulfasalazine is NOT effective for ileal or ileocolonic CD. (Conditional recommendation, moderate quality evidence)
Recommendation 41 (Antibiotics not effective for luminal CD)
Antibiotics are NOT an effective treatment for luminal inflammatory Crohn's disease and should NOT be used as
primary therapy for luminal CD. Antibiotics remain indicated for infectious complications (abscesses, perianal
sepsis). (Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence)
Recommendation 42 (Diet-based strategies in mild low-risk CD)
For adult patients with mild CD and low risk of disease progression, diet-based strategies (e.g., Mediterranean-type
diet, CD exclusion diet) with careful monitoring may be considered as part of a comprehensive management
approach. (Conditional recommendation, low quality evidence)
Recommendation 44 (Biosimilars for de novo CD)
Biosimilar infliximab, adalimumab, and ustekinumab are effective for de novo induction and maintenance therapy in
patients with moderate-to-severe Crohn's disease. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence)
Recommendation 45 (Biosimilar switching in stable CD)
There are safety and efficacy data supporting transition or switching to biosimilar infliximab or adalimumab in
patients with Crohn's disease who are in stable remission on maintenance therapy. (Conditional recommendation,
moderate quality evidence)
Recommendation 47 (IV corticosteroids in hospitalized CD)
For hospitalized patients with severe-to-fulminant Crohn's disease, IV corticosteroids may be used to control
inflammatory burden while evaluating steroid-sparing options. IV corticosteroids are a bridge to definitive therapy,
not a long-term solution. (Conditional recommendation, very low quality evidence)
Recommendation 48 (Anti-TNF in severe inpatient CD)
Anti-TNF agents are effective for severely active Crohn's disease. Infliximab may be administered in the inpatient
setting for severe-to-fulminant CD, including as rescue therapy. (Conditional recommendation, low quality evidence)
Recommendation 49 (Antibiotics for simple perianal fistula)
Antibiotics (imidazoles: metronidazole or ciprofloxacin) can be considered for patients with SIMPLE perianal fistulas
as primary therapy. Antibiotics provide symptomatic relief but do not achieve fistula healing — advanced therapy is
required for definitive management. (Conditional recommendation, very low quality evidence)

-- 22 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 23
Recommendation 50 (Drainage + seton before advanced therapy)
Drainage of perianal abscesses AND appropriate seton placement to facilitate drainage should be undertaken
BEFORE commencing advanced therapy (biologics) for perianal fistulising Crohn's disease. Initiating biologic
therapy in the presence of undrained sepsis is contraindicated. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality
evidence)
Recommendation 51 (Stricture: triple assessment)
For CD patients with strictures, symptom assessment, radiological evaluation (MRE or CTE), and endoscopic
assessment are ALL necessary to guide clinical approach. Distinguish between inflammatory strictures (amenable to
medical therapy) and fibrostenotic strictures (requiring endoscopic or surgical intervention). (Strong
recommendation, low quality evidence)
Recommendation 52 (Inflammatory stricture: medical therapy)
Symptomatic CD strictures WITH endoscopic or radiological evidence of active inflammation may respond to
advanced therapies (biologics, JAK inhibitors). Treat the inflammatory component before considering endoscopic or
surgical intervention. (Conditional recommendation, very low quality evidence)
Recommendation 53 (Fibrostenotic stricture: dilation or surgery)
Symptomatic CD strictures with predominantly fibrostenotic features (minimal active inflammation) may benefit from
endoscopic balloon dilation (for short, accessible strictures) or surgical resection. Endoscopic dilation has
acceptable short-term outcomes but high recurrence rates. (Conditional recommendation, low quality evidence)
Recommendation 54 (Prophylactic treatment post-resection)
Prophylactic treatment is recommended after small intestinal resection in patients with RISK FACTORS for
postoperative CD recurrence. Risk-stratify all patients prior to initiating postoperative prophylaxis. (Strong
recommendation, moderate quality evidence)
Recommendation 55 (Risk factors for postoperative recurrence)
Risk factors for postoperative CD recurrence that should inform treatment decisions: smoking, prior intestinal
resection, penetrating disease behaviour, extensive small bowel involvement, perianal disease, and failure of prior
immunosuppressive or biologic therapy. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence)
Recommendation 56 (Surgery for localized short-segment CD)
Surgery may be considered as a primary therapeutic option for patients with symptomatic CD localized to a short
segment of bowel (particularly terminal ileal disease), where benefits of resection may outweigh long-term medical
therapy risks. (Conditional recommendation, low quality evidence)
Recommendation 57 (Surgery for enteric complications)
Surgery is required to treat enteric complications of Crohn's disease, including: intestinal obstruction unresponsive to
medical therapy, fistulae causing significant morbidity, and abdominal abscesses not amenable to percutaneous
drainage. (Strong recommendation, low quality evidence)
Recommendation 58 (Intestinal resection most common surgery)
Resection of a segment of diseased intestine is the most common surgical procedure for Crohn's disease.
Bowel-sparing techniques (strictureplasty) should be prioritised where possible to preserve intestinal length. (Strong
recommendation, low quality evidence)
Recommendation 59 (Abdominal abscess: drainage then reassess)
CD patients who develop abdominal abscess should initially undergo surgical or radiologically guided percutaneous
drainage. Some patients may respond to medical therapy after drainage; others will require subsequent surgical
resection of the involved segment. (Conditional recommendation, very low quality evidence)

-- 23 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 24
Key Concept: Biologic dose optimisation
Biologic therapy dose optimisation (escalating dose or shortening interval) may be considered for patients with
inadequate or loss of response to any biologic agent. Therapeutic drug monitoring should guide optimisation where
available.
Key Concept: Thiopurine + anti-TNF combination (immunogenicity)
Azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine, or methotrexate may be used as adjunctive therapy to reduce immunogenicity of
anti-TNF agents. Combination therapy reduces anti-drug antibody formation and improves trough levels — this
indication is independent of active disease control.
Key Concept: TPMT testing required before thiopurine
Thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) activity testing OR TPMT/NUDT15 genotyping is REQUIRED before the initial
use of azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine. Low or absent TPMT activity is a contraindication to standard-dose
thiopurine therapy.
Recommendation 4
We recommend against the use of oral mesalamine for induction or maintenance in patients with mildly to
moderately active CD (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence).
Recommendation 5
We recommend controlled ileal release budesonide at a dose of 9 mg daily for induction of symptomatic remission in
patients with mildly to moderately active ileocecal CD (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence).
Recommendation 6
We recommend against the use of ileal release budesonide for maintenance of remission in patients with mildly to
moderately active ileocecal CD (strong recommendation, low level of evidence).
Recommendation 39
No maintenance treatment is a treatment option for some patients with asymptomatic (silent), mild CD; however,
routine monitoring is recommended to identify disease progression.
Recommendation 40
Sulfasalazine should only be considered for patients with symptomatic mild colonic CD.
Recommendation 41
Antibiotics are not an effective treatment for luminal inflammatory CD and should not be used as a primary therapy.
Recommendation 42
For adult patients with mild CD and low risk of progression, dietbased strategies along with careful monitoring for
inadequate symptom relief, worsening inflammation, or disease progression may be considered.
Recommendation 7
We recommend oral corticosteroids for short-term induction of remission in patients with moderately to severely
active CD (strong recommendation, low level of evidence).
Recommendation 8
We recommend against azathioprine (at doses of 1.5–2.5 mg/kg/d) and 6-mercaptopurine (at doses of 0.75–1.5
mg/kg/d) for induction of remission in moderately to severely active CD (strong recommendation, moderate level of
evidence).

-- 24 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 25
Recommendation 9
We suggest azathioprine (at doses of 1.5–2.5 mg/kg/d) and 6mercaptopurine (at doses of 0.75–1.5 mg/kg/d) for
maintenance of remission in patients with moderately to severely active CD who had induction of remission with
corticosteroids (conditional recommendation, low level of evidence).
Recommendation 10
We recommend TPMT testing before initial use of azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine to treat patients with CD (strong
recommendation, low level of evidence).
Recommendation 11
We suggest methotrexate (up to 25 mg once weekly intramuscular or subcutaneous) for maintenance of remission in
patients with moderately to severely active CD who had induction of remission with corticosteroids (conditional
recommendation, moderate level of evidence).
Recommendation 43
Azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine, or methotrexate may be used in treatment of active CD and as adjunctive therapy
for reducing immunogenicity associated with anti-TNF therapy.
Recommendation 12
We recommend anti-TNF agents (intravenous infliximab, subcutaneous adalimumab, subcutaneous certolizumab
pegol) for induction and maintenance of remission for moderately to severely active CD (strong recommendation,
moderate level of evidence).
Recommendation 13
We recommend combination therapy of intravenous infliximab with immunomodulators (thiopurines) as compared
with treatment with either immunomodulators alone or intravenous infliximab alone in patients with CD who are naive
to those agents (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence).
Recommendation 14
We recommend subcutaneous infliximab as an option for maintenance of remission in patients with moderately to
severely active CD who respond to intravenous induction with infliximab (strong recommendation, moderate level of
evidence).
Recommendation 44
Biosimilar infliximab, adalimumab, and ustekinumab are effective treatments for patients with moderate-to-severe
CD and can be used for de novo induction and maintenance therapy.
Recommendation 45
There are data to support the safety and efficacy of transitioning or switching to biosimilar infliximab or adalimumab
for with patients CD in stable disease maintenance.
Recommendation 15
We recommend intravenous vedolizumab for induction and maintenance of symptomatic remission in patients with
moderately to severely active CD (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence).
Recommendation 16
We recommend subcutaneous vedolizumab as an option for maintenance of remission in patients with moderately to
severely active CD who respond to 2 intravenous induction doses of vedolizumab (strong recommendation,
moderate level of evidence).

-- 25 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 26
Recommendation 17
We recommend ustekinumab in patients with moderate-tosevere CD for induction and maintenance of remission
(strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence).
Recommendation 46
Biologic therapy (including anti-IL-12/23 therapy, anti-TNF therapy, and anti-integrin therapy) dose optimization may
be considered for patients with inadequate or loss of response to that specific biologic agent’s induction and
maintenance.
Recommendation 18
We recommend the use of risankizumab for induction and maintenance of remission in patients with moderate to
severely active CD (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence).
Recommendation 19
We recommend the use of risankizumab as compared with ustekinumab in patients with moderate-to-severe CD and
prior exposure to anti-TNF therapy (conditional recommendation low level of evidence).
Recommendation 20
We recommend the use of mirikizumab for induction and maintenance of remission in patients with moderate to
severely active CD (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence).
Recommendation 21
We recommend the use of intravenous guselkumab for induction followed by subcutaneous guselkumab for
maintenance of remission in patients with moderate to severely active Crohn’s disease (strong recommendation,
moderate level of evidence).
Recommendation 22
We recommend the use of subcutaneous guselkumab for induction and maintenance of remission in patients with
moderate to severely active Crohn’s disease (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence).
Recommendation 23
We recommend upadacitinib for induction and maintenance of remission for patients with moderately to severely CD
who have previously been exposed to anti-TNF agents (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence).
Recommendation 47
For hospitalized patients presenting with severe to fulminant CD, intravenous corticosteroids may be used to control
inflammatory burden while evaluating steroid-sparing treatment options.
Recommendation 48
Anti-TNF agents are effective for severely active CD and infliximab may be administered in the inpatient setting for
patients with severe to fulminant disease.
Recommendation 24
We recommend infliximab for induction of remission of perianal fistulizing CD (strong recommendation, moderate
level of evidence).
Recommendation 25
We suggest adalimumab for induction of remission of perianal fistulizing CD (conditional recommendation, low level
of evidence).

-- 26 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 27
Recommendation 26
We suggest the use of antibiotics combined with infliximab or adalimumab to improve clinical response in perianal
fistulizing CD (conditional recommendation, very low level of evidence)
Recommendation 27
We suggest vedolizumab for induction of remission of perianal fistulizing CD (conditional recommendation, very low
level of evidence).
Recommendation 28
We suggest ustekinumab for induction of remission of perianal fistulizing CD (conditional recommendation, very low
level of evidence).
Recommendation 29
We suggest upadacitinib use for induction of remission of perianal fistulizing CD (conditional recommendation, very
low level of evidence).
Recommendation 49
Antibiotics (imidazoles) can be considered for patients with simple perianal fistulas as a primary therapy.
Recommendation 50
Drainage of perianal abscesses with appropriate placement of setons to facilitate drainage should be undertaken
before treating perianal fistulizing disease with advanced therapy to increase treatment effectiveness.
Recommendation 51
For patients with stricturing CD, symptom, radiologic, and endoscopic assessments are necessary to help guide
treatment approach.
Recommendation 52
Patients with CD with symptomatic strictures and evidence of active inflammation may respond to advanced
therapies.
Recommendation 53
Patients with CD with symptomatic strictures plus endoscopic or radiologic features indicating more of a
fibrostenoticpredominant picture may benefit from endoscopic dilation or surgery.
Recommendation 30
In patients with surgically induced remission of CD, we suggest postoperative endoscopic assessment at 6–12
months over no monitoring (conditional recommendation, moderate level of evidence).
Recommendation 31
In patients with CD with low-risk recurrence of postoperative disease, we suggest continued observation as
compared with immediate initiation of medical therapy for CD (conditional recommendation, very low level of
evidence).
Recommendation 54
Prophylactic treatment is recommended after small intestinal resection in patients with risk factors for recurrence.
Recommendation 32
We suggest imidazole antibiotics (metronidazole) at doses between 1 and 2 g/d after small intestinal resection in CD
patients to prevent recurrence (conditional recommendation, low level of evidence).

-- 27 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 28
Recommendation 33
In patients with high-risk CD, we recommend anti-TNF therapy to prevent postoperative endoscopic recurrence
(strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence).
Recommendation 34
In patients with high-risk CD, we recommend vedolizumab therapy to prevent postoperative recurrence (conditional
recommendation, low level of evidence).
Recommendation 55
Risk factors for postoperative CD recurrence should be considered when deciding on treatment.
Recommendation 56
Surgery may be considered for patients with symptomatic CD localized to a short segment of bowel.
Recommendation 57
Surgery is required to treat enteric complications of CD.
Recommendation 58
A resection of a segment of diseased intestine is the most common surgery for a patient with CD.
Recommendation 35
We suggest that an intra-abdominal abscess (.2 cm) be treated with antibiotics and a drainage procedure, and
immunosuppression held until drainage is achieved, either radiographically or surgically (conditional
recommendation, low level of evidence).
Recommendation 59
Patients with CD who develop an abdominal abscess should undergo a surgical resection. However, some may
respond to medical therapy after radiologically guided drainage.
Recommendation 1
Disease Classincation: There is a need to denne novel IBD subtypes and phenotypes based on molecular markers.
Artincial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) have been proposed to standardize and improve endoscopic,
histological, and radiological assessments. A longitudinal approach, with diverse ethnic representation, is
emphasized for validating biomarkers and phenotypes.
Recommendation 2
Endpoints: Consensus on objective and reproducible clinical endpoints is critical. AI and ML can help automate and
enhance these assessments, and enorts should focus on developing molecular biomarkers that correlate with
disease progression and allow for frequent monitoring and timely treatment adjustments.
Recommendation 3
Longitudinal Assessment: Ideal clinical trials would use prospective cohort designs with serial biomarker sampling.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
Recommendation 4
Clinical Translation: Companion diagnostic tests, commonly used in oncology, are essential for predicting
therapeutic responses in CD. Industry-backed research programs are needed to ensure the development of
validated, reproducible, and globally accessible biomarkers, which will facilitate biomarker-driven trials.

-- 28 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 29
Recommendation 5
Therapies: The success of precision medicine depends on enective therapeutic agents. While numerous biologics
and small molecules are under development, it is crucial to optimize the use of existing agents. AI and ML can assist
in optimizing drug choices and dosing, while combination therapies (biologics or biologics combined with small
molecules) may be necessary for some patients. Personalized approaches, including therapeutic drug monitoring,
will help improve treatment outcomes by enhancing our understanding of pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics.

-- 29 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 30
KNOWLEDGE BASE - SOCIETY GUIDELINES
STRIDE-II: Selecting Therapeutic Targets in Inflammatory Bowel Disease - Update
File: 15. STRIDE consensus.pdf
Turner D et al. Gastroenterology. 2021;161(5):1551-1569. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2021.06.051
13 rules extracted
STRIDE-II Recommendation 1
Clinical response is an immediate treatment target. Consider changing treatment if this target has not been
achieved.
STRIDE-II Recommendation 2
Clinical response should be denned as: a) CD: decrease of at least 50% in PRO2 (abdominal pain and stool
frequency), and in children decrease in PCDAI of at least 12.5 points and in wPCDAI at least 17.5 points b) UC:
decrease of at least 50% in PRO2 (rectal bleeding and stool frequency), and in children decrease in PUCAI of at
least 20 points
STRIDE-II Recommendation 3
Clinical remission is an intermediate (ie, medium-term) treatment target. Consider changing treatment if this target
has not been achieved.
STRIDE-II Recommendation 4
Clinical remission should be denned as: a) CD: PRO2 (abdominal pain n1 and stool frequency n3) or HBI <5; in
children by PCDAI (<10 points or <7.5 excluding the height item) or wPCDAI (<12.5 points) b) UC: PRO2 (rectal
bleeding¼0 and stool frequency¼0) or partial Mayo (<3 and no score >1), and in children PUCAI <10 points
STRIDE-II Recommendation 5
Clinical response or remission are insufncient to be used as long term treatment targets
STRIDE-II Recommendation 6
In children, restoration of normal growth is a long-term treatment target. Consider changing treatment if this target
has not been achieved.
STRIDE-II Recommendation 7
Endoscopic healing is a long-term target. Consider changing treatment if this target has not been achieved.
STRIDE-II Recommendation 8
Assessment of endoscopic healing can be achieved by sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy. When not feasible,
alternatives in CD can be capsule endoscopy or balloon enteroscopy.
STRIDE-II Recommendation 9
Endoscopic healing should be measured by: a) CD: SES-CD <3 points or absence of ulcerations (e.g. SES-CD
ulceration subscores ¼ 0) b) UC: Mayo endoscopic subscore ¼ 0 points, or UCEIS n1 points
STRIDE-II Recommendation 10
Histologic remission is not a treatment-target in either CD or UC. Nonetheless, in UC it could be used as an adjunct
to endoscopic remission to represent a deeper level of healing.

-- 30 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 31
STRIDE-II Recommendation 11
Transmural healing (assessed by CTE, MRE, or bowel ultrasound) is not a treatment-target in either CD or UC.
Nonetheless, in CD it should be used as an adjunct to endoscopic remission to represent a deeper level of healing.
STRIDE-II Recommendation 12
Normalization of CRP (to values under the upper limit of normal) and fecal calprotectin (to 100–250 mg/g)b is an
intermediate treatment target in UC and CD. Consider changing treatment if this target has not been achieved.
STRIDE-II Recommendation 13
Absence of disability and normalized health-related quality of life are long-term treatment targets. Consider changing
treatment if this target has not been achieved.

-- 31 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 32
KNOWLEDGE BASE - SOCIETY GUIDELINES
Diet and Inflammatory Bowel Disease: The Asian Working Group Guidelines
File: 2. Diet in IBD _Asian working group.pdf
Sood A et al. Indian J Gastroenterol. 2019;38(3):220-246. doi:10.1007/s12664-019-00976-1
59 rules extracted
Statement 12 (Malnutrition screening)
All patients with IBD are at higher risk of malnutrition; all patients should be screened for malnutrition at presentation
using a validated tool (e.g., MUST, NRS-2002). Malnutrition must be identified and addressed early in the disease
course.
Statement 13 (Malnutrition prevalence)
The prevalence of malnutrition in patients with IBD depends on disease subtype (CD > UC), severity, extent, and
duration of disease. Patients with CD, active disease, and extensive involvement are at highest risk.
Statement 14 (BMI insufficient for nutritional assessment)
Body mass index (BMI) alone is NOT sufficient for nutritional assessment of a patient with IBD. Validated
multidimensional tools (e.g., MUST, NRS-2002, global clinical assessment) and laboratory parameters should be
used.
Statement 15 (Dietician involvement)
Dieticians and/or nutritionists should be ACTIVELY INVOLVED in the nutritional care of all patients with IBD — both
during active disease and in remission — as part of the multidisciplinary team.
Statement 16 (Acute severe UC: oral intake preferred)
For admitted patients with acute severe UC, adequate ORAL caloric intake is preferred over bowel rest. Bowel rest
is NOT recommended as routine management in ASUC; it does not improve outcomes.
Statement 17 (ASUC: reintroduce standard diet after stabilisation)
After stabilisation of acute severe UC, a standard diet should be gradually reintroduced. Routine use of oral
nutritional supplements is NOT recommended in this setting unless oral intake remains inadequate.
Statement 18 (Active CD: oral high-protein diet preferred over TPN)
For active inflammatory Crohn's disease, oral diet with adequate HIGH PROTEIN content is preferred to total
parenteral nutrition (TPN). Enteral nutrition (exclusive enteral nutrition or supplemental enteral nutrition) is preferred
over TPN when oral intake is insufficient.
Statement 19 (Remission: no dietary restriction needed)
Once in remission, no specific diet modification or food restriction is required — patients can continue a normal
balanced diet. Excessive dietary restriction in remission is not evidence-based and may worsen nutritional status.
Statement 20 (No specific food causes relapse)
No specific dietary item has been established to cause disease relapse in patients with IBD who are in remission.
Patients should not be advised to restrict specific foods on the assumption that they trigger relapse, unless there is a
clear individual intolerance.
Statement 21 (Milk: not routinely restricted)
Milk should NOT be routinely restricted in all IBD patients. Restriction is indicated only in patients with confirmed
severe hypolactasia (lactase deficiency). Unnecessary dairy restriction may worsen calcium and vitamin D status.

-- 32 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 33
Statement 22 (Gluten-free diet not indicated in IBD)
A gluten-free diet is NOT of proven value in patients with IBD (unless coeliac disease coexists). Routine adoption of
a gluten-free diet is not recommended and may have adverse nutritional consequences.
Statement 23 (Low-FODMAP diet for IBS-like symptoms only)
A low-FODMAP diet may help alleviate IBS-like symptoms (bloating, urgency, pain) associated with IBD. It is NOT a
treatment for IBD inflammation and should NOT be used as primary therapy for active luminal disease.
Statement 24 (Protein and caloric requirements)
Protein requirements are INCREASED in active IBD vs. remission (1.2–1.5 g/kg/day in active disease vs. 1.0
g/kg/day in remission). Caloric requirements in remission are similar to those of healthy individuals. Energy
requirements increase during active disease.
Statement 32 (Pre-surgical nutritional optimisation)
Nutritional status should be OPTIMISED before elective IBD surgery to reduce postoperative complications. If a
patient is malnourished, a period of nutritional support (7–14 days) before surgery is recommended.
Statement 33 (Pre-surgical enteral nutrition if oral insufficient)
If nutritional goals cannot be met with oral diet alone before elective IBD surgery, oral nutritional supplements or
enteral nutrition should be initiated BEFORE surgery. Parenteral nutrition is reserved for patients in whom the
gastrointestinal tract cannot be used.
Statement 34 (ERAS protocol in elective IBD surgery)
In elective IBD surgery, the Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) protocol should be followed in the
perioperative period. Key ERAS elements: preoperative carbohydrate loading, avoidance of prolonged preoperative
fasting, early postoperative feeding.
Statement 35 (Postoperative: restart oral diet early)
Oral diet or enteral nutrition should be started as soon as the patient can tolerate postoperatively (within 24 hours of
surgery where possible). Early postoperative feeding reduces complications and length of stay.
Statement 36 (Postoperative: nutritional support if oral not resumed in 7 days)
If oral diet cannot be resumed within 7 days postoperatively, enteral nutrition (preferred) OR parenteral nutrition
should be initiated to prevent further nutritional deterioration.
Statement 37 (Fistula: nutrition type based on location)
In CD patients with fistula, the type of nutritional support depends on fistula location: oral feeds can be given for
distal (low ileal or colonic) and low-output fistulas; partial or exclusive parenteral nutrition is required for proximal
(high jejunal) or high-output fistulas.
Statement 38 (Pregnancy nutrition in IBD)
IBD patients who are pregnant should be specifically evaluated for iron deficiency and folate deficiency, with
supplementation as required. Recommended Dietary Allowances for pregnancy (protein, micronutrients) should be
followed. Folate supplementation (at least 400–800 mcg/day) should be given to all pregnant women with IBD,
especially those on sulfasalazine (which requires 2 mg/day folate).
Statement 1
Diet has an important role in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), both ulcerative colitis (UC) and
Crohn’s disease (CD).

-- 33 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 34
Statement 2
Epidemiological studies indicate that adoption of Western diet (low in fruits and vegetables, rich in fats, ω-6 fatty
acids, red meat, and processed foods) contributes to the increasing incidence of inflammatory bowel disease in
developing countries.
Statement 3
Dietary constituents like maltodextrins and emulsifiers may have a role in the development of inflammatory bowel
disease.
Statement 4
Vitamin D may have a protective role in the natural history of inflammatory bowel disease.
Statement 5
Breastfeeding may have a protective role in the development of inflammatory bowel disease.
Statement 6
Exclusive enteral nutrition (EEN) is as effective as steroids in inducing remission in children with luminal Crohn’s
disease.
Statement 7
Exclusive enteral nutrition is effective in adult Crohn’s disease but is inferior to corticosteroids for inducing remission.
Statement 8
There is no difference between elemental and polymeric formulae in terms of efficacy.
Statement 9
Partial enteral nutrition has been documented to be useful for maintenance of remission in luminal Crohn’s disease
along with pharmacotherapy.
Statement 10
More evidence is required, before elimination diets such as specific carbohydrate diet (SCD), Crohn’s disease
exclusion diet (CDED), semi-vegetarian diet (SVD), antiIBD diet, or low fermentable oligosaccharides,
disaccharides, monosaccharides, and polyols (FODMAP) can be recommended as a therapy for Crohn’s disease.
Statement 11
There is no specific role for exclusive (EEN) or partial enteral nutrition (PEN) for induction or maintenance of
remission in patients with ulcerative colitis.
Statement 12
Patients with inflammatory bowel disease are at a higher risk of malnutrition; hence, all the patients should be
screened for it at presentation.
Statement 13
The prevalence of malnutrition in a patient with inflammatory bowel disease depends upon disease subtype,
severity, extent, and duration.
Statement 14
Body mass index alone is not sufficient for nutritional assessment of a patient with inflammatory bowel disease.
Statement 15
Dieticians/nutritionists should be involved in nutrition care of patients with inflammatory bowel disease.

-- 34 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 35
Statement 16
Dietary recommendations in inflammatory bowel disease: for admitted patients with acute severe ulcerative colitis,
adequate oral caloric intake is preferred to bowel rest.
Statement 17
After stabilization of acute severe ulcerative colitis, a standard diet should be gradually introduced and oral
nutritional supplements should not be a routine.
Statement 18
For active inflammatory Crohn’s disease, oral diet with high protein is preferred to total parenteral nutrition.
Statement 19
Once in remission, there is no need for diet modification or restriction and the patients can continue a normal diet as
other family members.
Statement 20
No dietary item in particular is established to cause relapse of disease activity in a patient in remission.
Statement 21
Milk should not be routinely restricted in all patients with inflammatory bowel disease unless patient has severe
hypolactasia.
Statement 22
A gluten-free diet is not of a proven value in patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
Statement 23
A low FODMAP diet may help in alleviating irritable bowel syndrome -like symptoms associated with IBD.
Statement 24
Patients with inflammatory bowel disease should receive adequate calories, proteins, and fats in their diet. The
calorie and protein requirement of a patient with IBD in remission is similar to that of a healthy individual. However,
the protein requirement is increased in a patient with active disease.
Statement 25
Patients with inflammatory bowel disease who have anemia should be evaluated appropriately for the cause of
anemia and adequately treated.
Statement 26
Proactive screening for osteopenia and its treatment should be done as per guidelines.
Statement 27
Patients should be screened for micronutrient deficiency including calcium, phosphate, magnesium, iron, folic acid,
and vitamin B12 in an appropriate clinical context.
Statement 28
Except for patients with stricturing Crohn’s disease, there is no evidence for recommending either a low or a high
fiber diet for patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
Statement 29
Patients with inflammatory bowel disease should refrain from alcohol as it may worsen the symptoms of the disease.

-- 35 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 36
Statement 30
Patients of inflammatory bowel disease should be encouraged to refrain from smoking.
Statement 31
There is no scientific evidence to recommend probiotics as a food supplement.
Statement 32
The nutritional status of patients with inflammatory bowel disease should be optimized prior to elective surgery for a
better outcome.
Statement 33
If the nutritional goals cannot be met with an oral diet alone, oral nutritional supplements (ONS) or enteral nutrition
should be initiated prior to surgery/ perioperative phase.
Statement 34
In elective surgery, the early/enhanced recovery after surgery protocol should be followed in the perioperative period
Statement 35
Oral diet/enteral nutrition should be started as soon as the patient can tolerate in the postoperative period
Statement 36
In the postoperative period, if oral diet cannot be resumed within 7 days then enteral/ parenteral nutrition should be
initiated.
Statement 37
In Crohn’s disease patients with a fistula, the type of diet depends upon the location of fistula–oral feeds for distal
(low ileal or colonic) and low output fistula, and partial or exclusive parenteral nutrition for proximal and high output
fistula.
Statement 38
Inflammatory bowel disease patients with pregnancy should be specifically evaluated for iron and folate defic i e n c
y a n d r e p l a c e m e n t d o n e a c c o r d i n g l y. Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA) for pregnancy and
lactation should be followed.
Statement 46
Fernández-Banares F, Cabré E, Esteve-Comas M, Gassull MA. How effective is enteral nutrition in inducing clinical
remission in active Crohn’s disease? A meta-analysis of the

-- 36 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 37
KNOWLEDGE BASE - SOCIETY GUIDELINES
ECCO Guidelines on Therapeutics in Crohn's Disease: Medical Treatment
File: 3. ECCO and Crohns.pdf
Gordon H et al. J Crohns Colitis. 2024;18(10):1531-1555. doi:10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjae091
31 rules extracted
Statement 1.1
We recommend against the use of 5-aminosalicylic acid for induction of remission of CD [strong recommendation,
moderate-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]
Statement 1.2
We recommend against the use of oral 5-aminosalicylic acid as maintenance therapy in CD [strong
recommendation, low-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, low-quality evidence]
Statement 2.1
We recommend budesonide for the induction of clinical remission in patients with active, mild-tomoderate CD limited
to the ileum and/or ascending colon [strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]
Statement 2.2
We suggest systemic corticosteroids can be used as induction therapy in patients with active, moderate-to-severe
CD [weak recommendation, moderatequality evidence]. [Consensus 100%]
Evidence: [weak recommendation, moderatequality evidence]
Statement 3.1
We recommend against the use of thiopurine monotherapy as induction therapy for CD [strong recommendation,
very low-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence]
Statement 3.2
We suggest thiopurine monotherapy can be used as maintenance therapy in CD [weak recommendation, low-quality
evidence]. [Consensus: 95%]
Evidence: [weak recommendation, low-quality evidence]
Statement 4.1
We suggest parenteral methotrexate can be used as induction therapy in moderate-to-severe CD [weak
recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 94%]
Evidence: [weak recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]
Statement 4.2
We suggest parenteral methotrexate monotherapy can be used as maintenance therapy in moderateto-severe CD
[weak recommendation, low-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 97%]
Evidence: [weak recommendation, low-quality evidence]

-- 37 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 38
Statement 5.1
We recommend infliximab as induction therapy with moderate-to-severe active CD [strong recommendation,
moderate-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]
Statement 5.2
We recommend infliximab as maintenance therapy in moderate-to-severe CD [strong recommendation, low-quality
evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, low-quality evidence]
Statement 5.3
We recommend combination therapy with a thiopurine when starting infliximab as induction therapy in patients with
moderate-to-severe CD [strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]
Statement 5.4
We recommend combination therapy with infliximab and thiopurines for a minimum of 6–12 months when using
infliximab as maintenance therapy in patients with CD [strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence].
[Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]
Statement 5.5
In patients with CD who have achieved long-term remission with the combination of anti-TNF and thiopurines, we
suggest de-escalation to anti-TNF monotherapy and withdrawal of thiopurines [weak recommendation,
moderate-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [weak recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]
Statement 6.1
We recommend adalimumab as induction therapy in patients with moderate-to-severe CD [strong recommendation,
moderate-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]
Statement 6.2
We recommend adalimumab monotherapy as maintenance therapy in moderate-to-severe CD [strong
recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]
Statement 6.3
We suggest adalimumab monotherapy should be used over combination therapy with thiopurines as induction
therapy in patients with moderate-to-severe CD naïve to biologics [weak recommendation, moderatequality
evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [weak recommendation, moderatequality evidence]
Statement 6.4
We suggest adalimumab monotherapy should be used over combination with an immunomodulator as maintenance
therapy in patients with moderate-tosevere CD naïve to biologics [weak recommendation, lowquality evidence].
[Consensus: 98%]
Evidence: [weak recommendation, lowquality evidence]

-- 38 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 39
Statement 7.1
We suggest certolizumab can be used as induction therapy in patients with moderate-to-severe CD [weak
recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 97%]
Evidence: [weak recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]
Statement 7.2
We suggest certolizumab can be used as maintenance therapy in moderate-to-severe CD [weak recommendation,
moderate-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [weak recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]
Statement 8.1
There is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of proactive therapeutic drug monitoring. compared with
reactive therapeutic drug monitoring or standard of care. when using anti-TNF agents [weak recommendation, very
low-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [weak recommendation, very low-quality evidence]
Statement 9.1
We recommend ustekinumab as induction therapy in moderate-to-severe CD [strong recommendation,
moderate-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]
Statement 9.2
We recommend ustekinumab as maintenance therapy in moderate-to-severe CD [strong recommendation,
moderate-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]
Statement 10.1
We suggest adalimumab or ustekinumab are equally as effective as induction therapy in biologicnaïve patients with
moderate-to-severe CD [weak recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [weak recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]
Statement 10.2
We suggest adalimumab and ustekinumab are equally as effective as maintenance therapy in biologicnainve
patients with moderate-to-severe CD [weak recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [weak recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]
Statement 11.1
We recommend risankizumab as induction therapy in moderate-to-severe CD [strong recommendation, high-quality
evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, high-quality evidence]
Statement 11.2
We recommend risankizumab as maintenance therapy in moderate-to-severe CD [strong recommendation;
high-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [strong recommendation; high-quality evidence]
Statement 12.2
We recommend vedolizumab as maintenance therapy in moderate-to-severe CD [strong recommendation,
moderate-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]

-- 39 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 40
Statement 13.1
We recommend upadacitinib as induction therapy in moderate-to-severe CD [strong recommendation; high-quality
evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [strong recommendation; high-quality evidence]
Statement 13.2
We recommend upadacitinib as maintenance therapy in moderate-to-severe CD [strong recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence]
Statement 12.1
We recommend vedolizumab as induction therapy in moderate-to-severe CD [strong recommendation,
moderate-quality evidence]. [Consensus: 100%]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]
Statement 14.1
We suggest exclusive enteral nutrition can be used as induction therapy in patients with mildto-moderate CD who
are motivated to adhere to dietary therapy, have access to dietetic support, and prefer to avoid corticosteroids.
[Weak recommendation, very low-quality evidence.] [Consensus: 100%] [Weak recommendation, very low-quality
evidence.]

-- 40 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 41
KNOWLEDGE BASE - SOCIETY GUIDELINES
ACG Clinical Guideline Update: Preventive Care in Inflammatory Bowel Disease
File: 4. acg_clinical_guideline_update__preventive_care_in.15.pdf
Farraye FA et al. Am J Gastroenterol. 2025;120(7):1447-1473. doi:10.14309/ajg.0000000000003541
21 rules extracted
Recommendation 4
In all adults 50 and older with IBD, we suggest vaccination against HZ with the 2-dose inactive recombinant HZ
vaccine (Conditional recommendation, low certainty of evidence)
Recommendation 5
In adults 19 and above with IBD on immune-modifying therapy or planning to start therapy, we suggest vaccination
against HZ with the 2-dose inactive recombinant HZ vaccine (Conditional recommendation, very low certainty of
evidence)
Recommendation 7
Adults with IBD should be evaluated for varicella immunity before initiating immune-modifying therapy, through
either a documented history of chickenpox infection or completion of a 2-dose varicella vaccine series. Serologic
testing is not recommended in previously vaccinated individuals because of the high false-negative rates. If
nonimmune status is confirmed, vaccination should be completed before initiating immunemodifying therapy when
possible.
Recommendation 6
In adults with IBD, we suggest vaccination against SARS-CoV-2 in accordance with national guidelines (Conditional
recommendation, very low certainty of evidence)
Recommendation 8
Household members of patients receiving immune-modifying therapies can receive live vaccines with certain
precautions.
Recommendation 1
MMR, varicella, and rotavirus vaccines should be administered to contacts when indicated. They recommend the
following precautions for varicella and rotavirus vaccine recipients. If a varicella vaccine recipient develops a rash
postimmunization, they should avoid contact with a person with altered immunocompetence until the rash resolves.
Recommendation 9
In patients with IBD (both UC and CD), we suggest annual screening for melanoma independent of the use of
biologic therapy (Conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence)
Recommendation 10
In patients with IBD on immune-modifying therapies (6mercaptopurine, azathioprine, methotrexate, JAK inhibitors, or
S1P receptor modulators), we suggest annual screening for NMSC while using these agents, particularly older than
the age of 50 (Conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence)
Recommendation 11
All patients with CD and UC should be screened for depression and anxiety at baseline and annually. Patients who
screen positive for anxiety and/or depression should be referred for counseling/therapy.

-- 41 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 42
Recommendation 11
In adults with IBD and conventional risk factors for abnormal bone mineral density, we suggest screening for
osteoporosis with bone mineral density testing at the time of diagnosis and periodically after diagnosis (Conditional
recommendation, very low certainty of evidence)
Recommendation 1
Parathyroid hormone excess
Recommendation 2
Primary and secondary thyroxin excess, endogenous and exogenous
Recommendation 3
Cortisol excess, endogenous and exogenous
Recommendation 1
Estrogen denciency (premenopausal state may be linked with anorexia, bulimia, athletic amenorrhea, premature
menopause, prolactinoma, or hypopituitarism)
Recommendation 2
Estrogen denciency, postmenopausal
Recommendation 3
Testosterone denciency, primary and secondary testicular failure
Recommendation 4
Vitamin D metabolite denciency, inadequate intake, or malabsorption Miscellaneous (not necessarily mediated by
hormonal abnormalities):
Recommendation 1
Medical conditions, including postgastrectomy states, idiopathic hypercalciuria, systemic mastocytosis, and
prolonged immobilization (paraplegia and quadriplegia)
Recommendation 2
Lifestyle factors, including cigarette smoking, excessive ingestion of caneine, and excessive sodium intake
(promotes hypercalciuria) Medications:
Recommendation 5
Tacrolimus Most of these conditions/states associated with low bone mass are not innuenced by changes in diet or
lifestyle. Each of the circumstances listed could have an impact on the skeleton at any time in an individual’s life.
The enect is accentuated if it occurs in conjunction with low estrogen levels after menopause. In addition, as with
low BMD, risk factors for bony fractures may be considered modinable or nonmodinable, as follows: Modinable risk
factors for abnormal BMD include current tobacco smoking, below-normal body weight (especially those with low
body weight that is less than 129 pounds), denciency of estrogen, menopause before age 45, bilateral ovariectomy,
premenopausal amenorrhea for .1 year, lifelong low intake of calcium, excessive consumption of ethanol, visual
impairment despite adequate correction (may increase risk of falling), repeated falls, inadequate physical activity,
frailty, or poor overall physical condition. Nonmodinable risk factors include history of fracture as an adult, family
history of fractures, especially among nrst-degree relatives, White, female sex, dementia, elderly, frailty, or poor
overall physical condition.
Recommendation 12
In adults with IBD who smoke, we suggest that they should be counseled to quit (Strong recommendation, low
certainty of evidence)

-- 42 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 43

-- 43 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 44
KNOWLEDGE BASE - SOCIETY GUIDELINES
ECCO Guidelines on Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Malignancies
File: 5. ECCO_IBD and malignancies.pdf
Gordon H et al. J Crohns Colitis. 2023;17(6):827-854. doi:10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjac187
55 rules extracted
Statement 3a (Non-polypoid dysplasia: EMR/ESD)
Non-polypoid dysplastic lesions without stigmata of invasive cancer can be treated by endoscopic mucosal resection
(EMR) or endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) by a trained endoscopist, provided there is no evidence of
multifocal or invisible dysplasia elsewhere in the colon. Complete en-bloc resection is preferred.
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 3b (Post-dysplasia resection: surveillance)
After endoscopic resection of a dysplastic lesion in IBD: perform surveillance colonoscopy with high-definition
chromoendoscopy or virtual chromoendoscopy at 3–6 months, then ANNUALLY based on the grade of dysplasia
and completeness of resection.
Evidence: [EL4]
Statement 3c (Surgery when endoscopic resection not feasible)
Patients with IBD-related dysplastic lesions that CANNOT be endoscopically resected en bloc (due to size, location,
or multifocality) should be offered surgery (colectomy).
Evidence: [EL4]
Statement 4a (Anal cancer risk in perianal CD)
Patients with anal and/or perianal Crohn's disease are at INCREASED RISK of anal cancer, particularly
fistula-related adenocarcinoma. Chronic active perianal fistulising disease may be associated with advanced cancer
stage at diagnosis.
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 4b (Change in anal symptoms: re-evaluate immediately)
ANY change in anal symptoms in patients with chronic perianal Crohn's disease (e.g., new pain, altered discharge,
or fistula tract changes) should trigger IMMEDIATE RE-EVALUATION including MRI and biopsy to exclude
malignancy.
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 5a (IPAA: risk factors for pouch dysplasia)
Preoperative diagnosis of dysplasia or cancer of the colon or rectum is a risk factor for pouch dysplasia or
adenocarcinoma after ileal pouch-anal anastomosis (IPAA).
Evidence: [EL1]
Statement 5b (IPAA: annual surveillance if prior dysplasia/cancer or PSC)
IBD patients with IPAA who had preoperative colonic dysplasia or cancer, AND patients with IBD + primary
sclerosing cholangitis (PSC): ANNUAL endoscopic surveillance of the pouch is required.
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 6a (Cholangiocarcinoma: higher risk in IBD+PSC)
IBD patients have a higher risk of cholangiocarcinoma compared with the general population, particularly patients
with UC + PSC. Risk is highest in the first year after PSC diagnosis.
Evidence: [EL3]

-- 44 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 45
Statement 6b (Cholangiocarcinoma surveillance: imaging every 6-12 months)
Cholangiocarcinoma surveillance should be considered in ALL patients with IBD + PSC, regardless of disease
stage. Appropriate imaging (MRI/MRCP or ultrasound) should be performed every 6–12 months.
Evidence: [EL4]
Statement 7a (Small bowel adenocarcinoma risk in CD)
CD patients with small-bowel involvement have an increased risk of small-bowel cancers. The most common:
small-bowel adenocarcinoma in areas of chronic inflammation, predominantly the distal jejunum and ileum.
Evidence: [EL1]
Statement 7b (Consider small bowel adenocarcinoma in refractory stricturing CD)
Consider small-bowel adenocarcinoma in the differential diagnosis of patients with refractory, long-standing,
stricturing Crohn's disease or relevant new symptoms (obstruction, weight loss, anaemia). Biopsy and imaging are
required for diagnosis.
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 7c (No routine small bowel cancer surveillance in CD)
Routine surveillance with imaging or endoscopy specifically for small-bowel cancer in CD is NOT currently
recommended due to insufficient evidence. Clinical vigilance for new or worsening symptoms is required.
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 10a (Thiopurine: lymphoproliferative and myeloproliferative risk)
Thiopurine monotherapy is associated with increased risk of lymphoproliferative disorders [EL1] and
myeloproliferative disorders [EL3]. Risk is increased in OLDER patients (>65 years). Risk decreases gradually after
thiopurine withdrawal.
Statement 10b (EBV screening before thiopurine in young males)
EBV serology should be checked in young adult MALES before starting thiopurine therapy [EL5]. If EBV IgG is
NEGATIVE (seronegative): medications other than thiopurines should be considered, as primary EBV infection on
thiopurines carries risk of aggressive fatal lymphoma.
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 12 (Anti-TNF: lymphoma and melanoma risk; skin surveillance)
Anti-TNF monotherapy may increase the risk of lymphoma and melanoma in IBD patients [EL2]. Annual skin cancer
surveillance and sun protection advice are required for all patients on anti-TNF therapy.
Statement 14a (Combination anti-TNF+thiopurine: HSTCL risk)
The combination of anti-TNF + thiopurine therapy is associated with lymphoma risk GREATER than either
monotherapy [EL2]. HEPATOSPLENIC T-CELL LYMPHOMA (HSTCL) risk is significantly increased, particularly in
MALES UNDER 30 YEARS receiving combination therapy for more than 2 years. HSTCL is rare but typically fatal.
Statement 14b (Combination: no additional solid-organ or skin cancer risk)
Combined anti-TNF + thiopurine therapy does NOT confer additional solid-organ or skin cancer risk beyond the risks
associated with either monotherapy [EL3]. No additional surveillance beyond standard monotherapy
recommendations is required.
Statement 15 (Methotrexate: NMSC risk)
Methotrexate may be associated with increased risk of non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) [EL5]. Insufficient
evidence exists for additional screening beyond general population NMSC surveillance. Sun protection is advised.

-- 45 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 46
Statement 16 (JAK inhibitors: no increased cancer risk currently)
JAK inhibitors: no current evidence of increased overall cancer risk in IBD [EL4]. Long-term safety data remain
limited. Exercise caution in patients with prior malignancy.
Statement 17 (Vedolizumab: no increased cancer risk)
Vedolizumab is not associated with increased cancer risk [EL4]. Long-term safety data are accumulating and are
reassuring. Vedolizumab is preferred for patients with prior malignancy or high cancer risk.
Statement 18 (Anti-IL-12/23: no increased cancer risk)
Anti-IL-12/23 agents (ustekinumab, risankizumab, guselkumab, mirikizumab): no evidence of increased overall
cancer risk [EL4]. Long-term data are reassuring.
Statement 19 (Cancer therapy interactions with IBD)
Hormone therapy for cancer may increase IBD relapse risk. Radiation and chemotherapy do NOT appear to
increase IBD relapse [EL3]. Checkpoint inhibitors (anti-PD1/PD-L1) are associated with immune-mediated colitis
and HIGHER IBD reactivation risk [EL4] — close monitoring is essential.
Statement 20 (Thiopurines in prior malignancy: no increased recurrence)
Thiopurine use in IBD patients with a PAST malignancy does NOT appear to increase cancer recurrence risk
beyond known class risk, based on available data. Most data come from patients starting thiopurines more than 5
years after cancer treatment.
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 21 (Thiopurine withdrawal in active cancer)
Thiopurines should PREFERABLY be withdrawn in patients with ACTIVE cancer [EL5]. Patients with
non-aggressive basal cell carcinoma (BCC) or preneoplastic cervical lesions may continue thiopurine with close
oncological monitoring. Decisions should be made in a multidisciplinary setting.
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 22 (Methotrexate: insufficient data in prior malignancy)
Insufficient data exist on the safety of methotrexate in IBD patients with a prior malignancy [EL5]. Use with caution;
case-by-case multidisciplinary decision required.
Statement 23 (Anti-TNF in prior/current cancer: MDT decision)
Anti-TNF agents may be used in IBD patients with current or previous cancer. All decisions must be made on a
case-by-case basis in a multidisciplinary oncology setting, weighing IBD disease activity, cancer type and prognosis,
and available alternative IBD therapies.
Statement 24 (Vedolizumab/ustekinumab in prior malignancy: safe)
Vedolizumab [EL3] and ustekinumab [EL4] do NOT appear to increase cancer recurrence in IBD patients with a prior
malignancy. These agents are preferred in patients with prior malignancy where biologic therapy is required.
Insufficient evidence for JAK inhibitors in prior or active malignancy.
Statement 1
Patients with IBD of the colon should be informed that they are at increased risk of developing colorectal cancer
[CRC] [EL1] The risk of colorectal cancer is highest in patients with ulcerative colitis [UC] with extensive disease,
and increases significantly 8–10 years after diagnosis or when dysplasia is detected on colonic biopsies [or both],
particularly high-grade dysplasia [EL1] Risk factors include male sex, young age at UC diagnosis, family history of
CRC, and the presence of colonic strictures or primary sclerosing cholangitis [EL1] Consensus: 100%
Evidence: [EL1], [EL1], [EL1]

-- 46 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 47
Statement 2.1
Screening colonoscopy should be performed in all IBD patients 8 years after onset of first symptoms to assess
disease extent and exclude dysplasia [EL4] Consensus: 95%
Evidence: [EL4]
Statement 2.2
In IBD patients with disease limited to the rectum without evidence of previous or current endoscopic or microscopic
inflammation proximal to the rectum or with isolated small-bowel disease, no subsequent additional screening
Statement 2.3
In IBD patients with concurrent PSC, an annual surveillance colonoscopy should be performed following the
diagnosis of PSC, irrespective of disease activity, extent, and duration [EL3] Consensus: 96.3%
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 2.4
Patients with high-risk features [family history of CRC in a first-degree relative ≤50 years of age, colonic stricture or
dysplasia, PSC, extensive colitis with severe active inflammation] should have their next surveillance colonoscopy
scheduled for 1 year. [EL4] Patients with intermediate risk factors should have their next surveillance colonoscopy
scheduled for 2–3 years. Patients with neither intermediate nor high-risk features should have their next surveillance
colonoscopy scheduled for 5 years [EL5] Consensus: 87.5%
Evidence: [EL4], [EL5]
Statement 2.5
Colonoscopic surveillance is best performed when IBD is in remission, as it is otherwise difficult to discriminate
between dysplasia and inflammation on mucosal biopsies [EL5] Consensus: 96.2%
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 3
Polypoid dysplastic lesions can be treated by endoscopic resection when the lesion can be excised entirely en bloc,
provided there is no evidence of multifocal or invisible dysplasia elsewhere in the colon [EL2] Non-polypoid
dysplastic lesions without stigmata of invasive cancer can be treated by endoscopic mucosal resection or
submucosal dissection by trained endoscopists in selected cases, provided there is no evidence of multifocal or
invisible dysplasia elsewhere in the colon. [EL3] Ideally, complete en-bloc resection should be achieved.
Surveillance colonoscopy with high-definition dye chromoendoscopy or virtual electronic chromoendoscopy should
be performed after 3–6 months and then annually after endoscopic resection, based on the grade of dysplasia
detected [EL4] Patients should be offered surgery when dysplastic lesions cannot be endoscopically resected.
Factors that may render
Evidence: [EL2], [EL3], [EL4]
Statement 4
Patients with anal or perianal Crohn’s disease [CD] or both are at increased risk for anal cancer, particularly
fistularelated adenocarcinoma. [EL3] Chronic active perianal fistulising disease may be associated with advanced
cancer stage at the time of diagnosis. [EL3] In case of any change in anal symptoms, patients with chronic perianal
CD should be re-evaluated [EL5] Consensus: 100%
Evidence: [EL3], [EL3], [EL5]
Statement 5
In patients with IBD and IPAA, a preoperative diagnosis of dysplasia or cancer of the colon or rectum is a risk factor
for pouch dysplasia or adenocarcinoma. [EL1] In these patients and in patients with PSC, annual pouch surveillance
should be performed [EL3] Consensus: 100%
Evidence: [EL1], [EL3]

-- 47 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 48
Statement 6
Patients with IBD are at higher risk for cholangiocarcinoma compared with the general population, particularly
patients with UC and concomitant PSC [EL3] Surveillance for cholangiocarcinoma should be considered in all
patients with IBD and PSC regardless of disease stage, and is most relevant in the first year after diagnosis [EL3]
Surveillance for cholangiocarcinoma should include appropriate imaging and should be performed every 6 to 12
months [EL4] Consensus: 100%
Evidence: [EL3], [EL3], [EL4]
Statement 7
Patients with CD, particularly those with small-bowel involvement, have an increased risk of small-bowel cancers
[EL1] Small-bowel adenocarcinoma is the most common subtype and is found in areas of inflammation,
predominantly the distal jejunum and ileum. [EL3] The diagnosis should be considered in patients with refractory,
long-standing, stricturing disease or relevant symptoms [EL5] At present, routine surveillance with imaging or
endoscopy is not recommended for small-bowel cancers [EL5] Consensus: 95.0%
Evidence: [EL1], [EL3], [EL5], [EL5]
Statement 8
There is a small increased risk of non-gastrointestinal solidorgan tumours in IBD compared with the general
population. [EL2] Since there is no evidence to recommend a different approach to prevention and early diagnoses
of extraintestinal cancers, patients with IBD should be encouraged to follow the same primary and secondary
prevention programmes as the general population, based on individual risks [EL5] Consensus: 100%
Evidence: [EL2], [EL5]
Statement 9
There is an increased risk of haematological malignancy in patients with IBD compared with the general population.
However, there is insufficient evidence to determine whether the risk is independent of the effects of therapy or other
risk factors [EL3] Consensus: 95.5%
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 10
Patients on thiopurine monotherapy are at increased risk for lymphoproliferative disorders [EL1] and
myeloproliferative disorders. [EL3] The risk is increased for older patients. Before starting therapy, screening for
Epstein-Barr virus [EBV] infection should be considered in young adult male patients; [EL5] in patients negative for
EBV IgG, medications other than thiopurines may be considered. [EL5] This should inform treatment selection,
particularly in older patients or those with other risks for lymphoma [EL5] Consensus: 100%
Evidence: [EL1], [EL3], [EL5], [EL5], [EL5]
Statement 11
Thiopurines and overall cancer risk There is insufficient evidence to conclude that there is an increased overall risk
of solid-organ cancer or site-specific cancer other than skin cancer or cervical neoplasia in patients with IBD on
thiopurine monotherapy [EL3]
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 12
There is no evidence of an overall increase in the risk of cancer in IBD patients treated with TNFα-antagonist
monotherapy, although the risk of lymphoma and melanoma may be increased. [EL2] Skin-cancer surveillance and
sun protection measures tailored to individual risk should be encouraged. [EL5] However, there are insufficient data
to recommend additional screening measures beyond those recommended for the general population. Consensus:
100%
Evidence: [EL2], [EL5]

-- 48 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 49
Statement 13
There is no evidence of an additional increase in risk of solid-organ or skin cancer in patients with IBD treated with
combination therapy with an TNFα antagonist and a thiopurine or methotrexate [EL3] compared with the risks
associated with monotherapy with either of these agents. Surveillance measures in addition to those recommended
for monotherapy are not required [EL5] Consensus: 90.0%
Evidence: [EL3], [EL5]
Statement 14
The risk of lymphoma associated with combined TNFα antagonist and thiopurine therapy is greater than that of
thiopurine or TNFα antagonist monotherapy. [EL2] This should inform treatment selection, particularly in older
patients or those with other risks for lymphoma [EL5] Combined TNFα antagonist and thiopurine therapy
significantly increases the risk of a rare hepatosplenic T cell lymphoma, particularly in male patients <30 years of
age with CD [EL4] Insufficient data exist on the risk of lymphoma in IBD patients exposed to TNFα antagonists in
combination with methotrexate. Consensus: 100%
Evidence: [EL2], [EL5], [EL4]
Statement 15
Patients treated with methotrexate may be at increased risk of NMSC. [EL5] There is insufficient evidence to support
additional screening for skin cancer beyond that recommended for the general population [EL5] Consensus: 100%
Evidence: [EL5], [EL5]
Statement 16
There is no evidence that the overall risk of cancer is increased in patients with IBD treated with JAK inhibitors. [EL4]
However, long-term data are lacking in patients with IBD. Consensus: 100%
Evidence: [EL4]
Statement 17
Current evidence does not show an increased risk of malignancy in patients with IBD treated with vedolizumab.
[EL4] However, long-term data are lacking. Consensus: 100%
Evidence: [EL4]
Statement 18
Current evidence does not show an increased overall risk of cancer in IBD patients treated with anti IL-12/23 agents.
[EL4] However, long-term data are lacking in IBD. Consensus: 100%
Evidence: [EL4]
Statement 20
Current evidence suggests that there is no additional risk of incident cancer with thiopurine use in patients with IBD
and a past history of malignancy beyond the known risk associated with this class. However, most observational
data are from patients starting treatment with thiopurines more than 5 years after cancer resolution, and in patients
with a low risk of cancer recurrence [EL4] Consensus: 100%
Evidence: [EL4]
Statement 19
There is limited evidence to suggest that hormone therapy increases the risk of relapse in patients with IBD in
remission at treatment initiation, whereas radiation and chemotherapy do not. [EL3] Data on the use of checkpoint
inhibitors in patients with IBD are limited but indicate higher rates of IBD reactivation. [EL4] Patients with IBD being
treated for cancer should be monitored closely for potential flares [EL5] Consensus: 100%
Evidence: [EL3], [EL4], [EL5]

-- 49 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 50
Statement 21
Thiopurines should preferably be withdrawn in patients with an active cancer diagnosis. [EL5] Patients with
non-aggressive BCC or preneoplastic lesions of the cervix may continue thiopurine therapy with close monitoring
[EL5] Consensus: 100%
Evidence: [EL5], [EL5]
Statement 22
There are insufficient data to make recommendations regarding the safety of methotrexate use in patients with prior
malignancies [EL5] Consensus: 100%
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 23
TNFα antagonists may be used in patients with IBD and current or previous cancer. However, data on individual
cancer types and timing of treatment with TNFα antagonists are lacking. [EL4] Decisions should be made on a -
case-by-case basis in a multidisciplinary setting involving oncologists, and should consider factors including current
and recent IBD activity and alternative treatment options [EL5] Consensus: 100%
Evidence: [EL4], [EL5]
Statement 24
IBD patients with a history of prior malignancy do not appear to have an increased risk of cancer recurrence or new
cancer when treated with vedolizumab [EL3] or ustekinumab. [EL4] There is insufficient evidence to make
recommendations on the use of JAK inhibitors for patients with current or prior malignancy [EL5] There are
insufficient data regarding the safety of vedolizumab, ustekinumab, or JAK inhibitors in patients with active
malignancy. Decisions should be made on a case-by-case basis in a multidisciplinary setting involving oncologists,
and should consider factors including current and recent IBD activity and alternative treatment options [EL5]
Consensus: 100%
Evidence: [EL3], [EL4], [EL5], [EL5]

-- 50 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 51
KNOWLEDGE BASE - SOCIETY GUIDELINES
ECCO Guidelines on Therapeutics in Ulcerative Colitis: Medical Treatment
File: 6. ECCO_UC and medical treatment.pdf
Raine T et al. J Crohns Colitis. 2022;16(1):2-17. doi:10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjab178
19 rules extracted
Recommendation 1
We recommend 5-aminosalicylates at a dose of ≥2 g/ day [d] to induce remission in patients with
mildly-tomoderately active UC [strong recommendation; quality of evidence low]
Evidence: [strong recommendation; quality of evidence low]
Recommendation 3
We suggest the use of oral 5-ASA [≥2 g/d] combined with topical [rectal] 5-ASA over oral 5-ASA monotherapy for
induction of remission in adult patients with active UC of at least rectosigmoid extent [weak recommendation; very
low-quality evidence]
Evidence: [weak recommendation; very low-quality evidence]
Recommendation 4
We recommend using topical [rectal] steroids for the induction of remission in patients with active distal colitis [strong
recommendation, very low-quality evidence] The use of topically administered steroids has been long established for
the induction of remission in patients with proctitis and distal colitis. Topically applied steroids offer the advantage
over systemic
Evidence: [strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence]
Recommendation 5
We suggest treatment with topical [rectal] 5-ASAs over topical [rectal] steroids for induction of remission in patients
with active distal UC [weak recommendation, very low quality of evidence]
Evidence: [weak recommendation, very low quality of evidence]
Recommendation 6
We suggest the use of colonic-release corticosteroids for induction of remission in patients with active
mildto-moderate UC [weak recommendation, low quality of evidence]
Evidence: [weak recommendation, low quality of evidence]
Recommendation 7
We suggest against the use of thiopurines as monotherapy for the induction of remission in patients with active UC
[weak recommendation, very low quality of evidence]
Evidence: [weak recommendation, very low quality of evidence]
Recommendation 8
We recommend the use of oral 5-ASA at a dose ≥2 g/day for maintenance of remission in UC patients [strong
recommendation; very low quality of evidence]
Evidence: [strong recommendation; very low quality of evidence]
Recommendation 9
We suggest the use of topical [rectal] 5-ASA for the maintenance of remission in patients with distal UC [weak
recommendation, very low-quality evidence]
Evidence: [weak recommendation, very low-quality evidence]

-- 51 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 52
Recommendation 10
We recommend monotherapy with thiopurines for the maintenance of remission in patients with steroiddependent
UC or who are intolerant to 5-ASA [strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence] We identified four
placebo-controlled RCTs on maintenance treatment with azathioprine in patients with UC who were
steroid-dependent or intolerant to 5-ASA [SoF Table 10, available as Supplementary data at ECCO-JCC
online].78,79,89,90 In 232 patients followed for 1 year, azathioprine was superior [56%] to placebo [35%] for the
maintenance of clinical remission [RR: 1.59; 95% CI: 1.19–2.11]. No placebo-controlled data on endoscopic or
histological remission, sustained clinical remission, or SAEs were available. In contrast to current clinical trials,
different disease activity indices and endpoint definitions were used. Hence, indirect comparisons with novel and
potentially more potent agents are difficult. Nevertheless, large-scale cohort studies highlighted the apparent clinical
benefit of thiopurine monotherapy.91 Since we do not recommend the use of thiopurines for induction of remission, it
is important that any maintenance strategy with thiopurines is planned alongside an effective induction agent. We
did not identify any RCTs of thiopurines other than azathioprine, but due to their closely related pharmacology, we
extend our recommendation across the drug class. Significant safety concerns do exist with the use of thiopurines.
This is particularly true in patients aged >65 years; use of thiopurines should be discouraged in this age
group.8,92–94 No evidence supports the use of methotrexate for the maintenance of remission in UC.95 An RCT of
methotrexate against placebo
Evidence: [strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence]
Recommendation 11
We recommend oral prednisolone for induction of remission in non-hospitalised patients with moderatelyto-severely
active UC [strong recommendation; very low quality of evidence] Despite a limited evidence base, the use of
systemic corticosteroids for the induction of remission in moderately-to-severely active UC is well established in
clinical practice. The limited evidence is due in part to the large effect size and limited alternative options at the time
of the original RCTs.97,98 A previous meta-analysis99 included five placebo-controlled RCTs, although only two of
them97,98 used standard systemic corticosteroids. Therefore, we performed a metaanalysis of just these two
studies and calculated an RR of 2.83 [95% CI: 1.79–4.46] for the induction of clinical remission. The quality of
evidence was rated as very low, due to a serious risk of bias, indirectness, and imprecision [in part since the number
of patients included in each study was low] [SoF Table 11, available as Supplementary data at ECCO-JCC online].
No information regarding AEs with steroid treatment was available in these two studies. Other studies established
the side-effect profile of corticosteroids in both short courses and also longer-term exposure in both UC and Crohn’s
disease.21,100 Due to the potential for side effects, some of which are irreversible, corticosteroid-free remission
represents a desired outcome for patients.101,102 Overall, we believe that the ample experience with systemic
steroids in clinical practice and the favourable balance between their potential benefits and harms [when used over
limited periods] support the recommendation of oral prednisolone [or another equivalent systemic steroid agent,
such as methylprednisolone or prednisone] as an option for induction of remission in patients with
moderately-toseverely active UC. For these reasons, our recommendation is graded as strong, despite the quality of
evidence being very low. A previous meta-analysis identified six RCTs that compared systemic prednisolone with
budesonide, and found a significantly higher chance of induction of remission but increased steroid-related AEs with
prednisolone.99 However, none of these RCTs used a colonicrelease budesonide formulation. We restrict our
recommendations for budesonide MMX in mild-to-moderately active disease, and prednisolone in
moderately-to-severely active UC, to reflect the study populations of the RCTs identified and the likely risk-benefit
profile in these different populations. It is important to note that there are no efficacy data supporting the use of
corticosteroids as maintenance therapies, and very limited data on the ability of these drugs to achieve endoscopic
response. Additionally, longer-term corticosteroid exposure is associated with significant safety concerns. Due to
this, along with the availability of drugs with proven ability to maintain corticosteroid-free remission,
Evidence: [strong recommendation; very low quality of evidence]
Recommendation 13
We recommend treatment with vedolizumab for the induction of remission in patients with moderately-toseverely
active UC who have inadequate response or intolerance to conventional therapy [strong recommendation, low
quality of evidence]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, low quality of evidence]

-- 52 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 53
Recommendation 14
We recommend treatment with tofacitinib to induce remission in patients with moderate-to-severe UC who have
inadequate response or intolerance to conventional therapy [strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence]
Recommendation 15
We recommend treatment with ustekinumab for the induction of remission in patients with moderately-to-severely
active UC with inadequate response or intolerance to conventional therapy. [strong recommendation, moderate
quality of evidence] A single RCT compared ustekinumab with placebo for induction therapy in patients with
moderately-to-severely active UC [SoF
Evidence: [strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence]
Recommendation 16
We recommend anti-TNF agents [infliximab, adalimumab, or golimumab] for the maintenance of remission in
patients with UC who responded to induction therapy with the same drug [strong recommendation, high-quality
evidence]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, high-quality evidence]
Recommendation 17
In UC patients who have lost response to an anti-TNF agent, there is currently insufficient evidence to recommend
for or against the use of therapeutic drug monitoring to improve clinical outcomes
Recommendation 18
We recommend vedolizumab for maintenance of remission in patients with UC who responded to induction therapy
with vedolizumab [strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence] We identified three RCTs that included 441
patients treated with intravenous vedolizumab or placebo, which reported on maintenance of clinical remission and
sustained clinical remission in adult patients with moderately-to-severely active UC who responded to induction
therapy [SoF Table 18, available as Supplementary data at ECCO-JCC online].122,123,143,144 Patients in these
trials were followed up for 52–60 weeks. We performed a meta-analysis of results from these trials. Clinical
remission was more common in inductionresponders who subsequently received vedolizumab compared with
placebo [RR: 2.37; 95% CI: 1.74–3.23]. Likewise, sustained clinical remission was also more common in patients
receiving vedolizumab maintenance therapy compared with placebo [20.7% vs 9.4%; RR: 2.16; 95% CI: 1.34–3.50].
The quality of evidence for these outcomes was moderate to high. The rate of SAEs across five studies involving
1288 patients was not significantly different between vedolizumab and placebo [RR: 0.71; 95% CI: 0.39–1.30]. The
quality of evidence for this outcome was moderate due to serious imprecision arising from sparse data.
Nevertheless, the safety profile of vedolizumab has been established in a large cohort study.112 In
Evidence: [strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence]
Recommendation 19
We suggest the use of vedolizumab rather than adalimumab for the induction and maintenance of remission in
patients with moderately-to-severely active ulcerative colitis [weak recommendation, low level of evidence]
Evidence: [weak recommendation, low level of evidence]
Recommendation 20
We recommend tofacitinib for maintaining remission in patients with UC who responded to induction therapy with
tofacitinib [strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence]
Recommendation 21
We recommend ustekinumab for the maintenance of remission in patients with UC who responded to induction
therapy with ustekinumab [strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence]
Evidence: [strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence]

-- 53 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 54
KNOWLEDGE BASE - SOCIETY GUIDELINES
ACG Clinical Guideline Update: Preventive Care in IBD - Summary Chart
File: 7. ACG_Preventive care chart.pdf
Farraye FA et al. Am J Gastroenterol. 2025;120(7):1447-1473. doi:10.14309/ajg.0000000000003541
5 rules extracted
General
Knowledge base - Society guidelines/7. ACG_Preventive care chart.pdf
ACG GUIDELINE
GUIDELINE Highlights | Preventive Care in Inflammatory Bowel Disease | Concept and Content: Erica Duh, MD |
Reviewer: Freddy Caldera, DO, MS, PhD, FACG | PCV 21 or PCV 20
INTERVAL
(immunocompromised) | If PCV naïve: PCV 21 or PCV 20 | If incomplete PCV: PCV 13 ≥1 y n PCV 21 or PCV 20 | If
PCV naïve: PCV 21 or PCV 20 | If incomplete PCV: PCV 13 + PPSV23 ≥5 y n PCV 21 or PCV 20 | If PCV naïve:
PCV 21 or PCV 20 | If incomplete PCV: ≥ 5 yrs since last PCV n PCV 21 or PCV 20 | • 2-dose inactive recombinant
herpes zoster vaccine. | • 0-1 month apart in immunocompromised; 2-6 months in all others. | Follow
recommendations from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. | Rotavirus vaccine | Infants exposed to |
biologics in-utero | Administer rotavirus vaccine to infants exposed to biologics in utero. | • ≥65 years n recombinant,
adjuvant or high dose influenza vaccine. | • Adults 19-64 years who are liver transplant recipients OR | on anti-TNF
monotherapy n high dose influenza vaccine | • All other adults 19-64 n standard dose influenza vaccine | • All adults
≥75 years | • Adults 50-74 years with certain medical conditions | (including patients with IBD and liver transplant
recipients) | Administer according to Advisory Committee on Immunization Practice Recommendations | 1. Evaluate
for seroprotection status (Check for HbsAb > 10 mIU/mL). | 2. If negative and previously immunized n provide
challenge dose | 3. Not immune n provide Hepatitis B vaccine 2 or 3 dose series. | Do NOT check serologic titers to
evaluate for | immunity to MMR or varicella. | Examples of completed | pneumonia vaccine | • PCV 13 and 2 doses | •
PCV 15 and PPSV 23 | • PCV 20 or PCV 21 | Provide age-appropriate vaccines before initiation of immunemodifying
therapies when possible.
INTERVAL
Women with IBD on immunemodifying therapy | • Within a year of onset of sexual activity | • Continue annually | • If
<30, continue for 3 consecutive years before increasing to every 3 years | • Assure receipt of HPV vaccine series | •
Annual screening for melanoma (independent of use of biologic therapy) | • Annual screening for NMSC (on
immune-modifying therapies ex: 6-MP, | azathioprine, methotrexate, JAK inhibitors, or S1P receptor modulators)
INTERVAL
Adults with IBD and conventional risk | factors for abnormal bone mineral density | At time of diagnosis and
periodically after diagnosis | IBD patients who smoke | Counseling for smoking cessation | Screen for depression
and anxiety at baseline and annually. Refer for | counseling/therapy. | 6-MP = 6-mercaptopurine

-- 54 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 55
KNOWLEDGE BASE - SOCIETY GUIDELINES
ECCO Guidelines on the Prevention, Diagnosis, and Management of Infections in
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
File: 8. ECCO_IBD and infections.pdf
Kucharzik T et al. J Crohns Colitis. 2021;15(6):879-913. doi:10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjab052
51 rules extracted
Immunosuppression classification: live vaccine rule
Live vaccines are CONTRAINDICATED in patients with moderate-to-severe immunosuppression (any biologic
monotherapy, combination immunosuppression, prednisolone >20 mg/day for >2 weeks, or within 3 months of
corticosteroid use at this level). For patients with selective or low-degree immunosuppression only, live vaccines can
be discussed case-by-case when benefit outweighs risk.
Evidence: [EL5]
Post-immunosuppression: delay before live vaccine
Wait at least 1–6 months after STOPPING immunosuppressive therapy before administering a live vaccine —
minimum 1 month after corticosteroids, minimum 3 months after conventional immunosuppressants, minimum 6
months after biologics.
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 7.1 (Travel counselling for immunosuppressed patients)
IBD patients on immunosuppressive therapy cannot be routinely advised against travelling to countries with
increased infection rates. However, pre-travel counselling regarding safety measures — including appropriate
vaccinations, food and water hygiene, insect protection, and malaria prophylaxis — is STRONGLY
RECOMMENDED before travel to endemic areas.
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 7.2 (Malaria risk not increased in IBD on immunosuppression)
IBD patients on immunosuppressive therapy do NOT appear to be at increased risk for acquiring malaria or
developing more severe malarial disease compared with the general population. Standard malaria prevention
guidelines (chemoprophylaxis, insect bite prevention) should be followed.
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 5.3 (Salmonella/Listeria: withhold immunosuppression)
Immunosuppressive therapy should be withheld temporarily until resolution of active Salmonella or Listeria infection.
Anti-TNF agents carry particular risk for Listeria monocytogenes infection. Prevention: food hygiene education —
avoid raw eggs, unpasteurised milk, raw-milk cheeses, and undercooked meat.
Evidence: [EL4]
Statement 5.7 (Nocardia risk on corticosteroids)
Patients on immunosuppressive therapy — particularly corticosteroids — are at risk for systemic and cutaneous
Nocardia infections. Nocardia should be considered in the differential diagnosis of pulmonary or cutaneous infiltrates
in immunosuppressed IBD patients.
Evidence: [EL5]

-- 55 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 56
Statement 6.1 (Systemic fungal infection: chemoprophylaxis not routine)
Risk of systemic fungal infection in IBD is low but mortality is HIGH when it occurs. Apart from Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia (PCP) prophylaxis in high-risk patients, routine chemoprophylaxis for systemic fungal infections is NOT
indicated. After systemic fungal infection: secondary prophylaxis and risk-benefit discussion with infectious disease
specialist are required.
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 7.3 (Probiotics probably safe on anti-TNF; caution with beta-haemolytic strains)
Probiotics in IBD patients on anti-TNF agents are probably safe, but safety may be a concern for probiotic
preparations with known beta-haemolytic activity. Routine probiotic use is not recommended in severely
immunosuppressed patients.
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 8.2 (Pre-treatment infection/vaccination checklist)
Before initiation of immunosuppressive treatment (preferably at the time of IBD diagnosis): complete a standardised
checklist on infection risk, vaccination status, and travel history. Vaccinate against VPDs before starting
immunosuppression where possible.
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 8.3 (Healthcare workers with IBD: TB testing and vaccination)
Healthcare workers with IBD on anti-TNF agents should undergo regular tuberculosis (TB) testing (IGRA annually or
per local occupational health guidelines). They should closely follow occupational vaccination programmes,
including influenza and hepatitis B.
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 2.1
IBD patients at risk for opportunistic infections are those treated with immunosuppressive agents, particularly in
combination [EL1]. Further predictive factors are malnutrition, obese body mass index [BMI], comorbidities, active
disease, and older age [EL3]
Evidence: [EL1], [EL3]
Statement 2.2
Immunosuppressive agents should be classified according to mechanism of action, dose, duration, and route of
administration [EL5]
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 3.1*
Serological screening for hepatitis A, B, C, HIV, Epsteinn Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, varicella zoster virus, and
measles virus [in the absence of documented past infection or vaccination for the latter two] is recommended for all
IBD patients at baseline [EL4] and especially before or during immunosuppressive treatment [EL1]. A Pap smear for
human papillomavirus screening is also recommended [EL1]
Evidence: [EL4], [EL1], [EL1]
Statement 3.2
In non-immune patients, vaccination for HAV should be considered before commencement of immunosuppressive
treatment [EL5]
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 3.3*
Patients with IBD should be vaccinated against hepatitis B to achieve an anti-HBs antibody level >10 IU/L [EL1]
Evidence: [EL1]

-- 56 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 57
Statement 3.4*
Patients with IBD and chronic hepatitis B infection should be treated with specific antiviral nucleos[t]ide analogues
[EL1]
Evidence: [EL1]
Statement 3.5*
Prophylactic treatment with antiviral agents is not recommended in patients with IBD and previous HBV infection [HB
core Ab-positive, HBsAg-negative] [EL3]
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 3.6*
Patients with IBD and hepatitis C should be treated in accordance with national and international guidelines [EL5].
Patients with IBD and hepatitis C should be closely monitored for disease exacerbation when being treated with
direct-acting antiviral agents [DAAs] [EL5]
Evidence: [EL5], [EL5]
Statement 3.7*
IBD patients with HIV infection can be treated with immunosuppressive therapy when on antiretroviral therapy with
stable CD4 counts and undetectable viral load. The CD4 count should be closely monitored [EL4]
Evidence: [EL4]
Statement 3.8*
Recombinant herpes zoster vaccine [RZV] is the preferred vaccine for patients with IBD disease, given its efficacy
and safety [EL3]. If RZV is not available, a live zoster vaccine [ZVL] is recommended in immunocompetent patients
with IBD aged ≥50 years [EL4] RZV remains recommended for patients with IBD receiving immunosuppressive
therapy [EL4]. If RZV is unavailable, ZVL may be considered in patients on low-dose immunosuppression [EL3]
Evidence: [EL3], [EL4], [EL4], [EL3]
Statement 3.9*
Concurrent CMV colitis worsens the prognosis of active IBD. Patients with refractory IBD should be tested for CMV
colitis [EL3], especially if they are not responding to immunosuppressive therapy [EL2]
Evidence: [EL3], [EL2]
Statement 3.10*
Immunohistochemistry [IHC], possibly tissue polymerase chain reaction [PCR], or both, are essential for confirming
active CMV infection [colitis] in IBD and should be the standard tests [EL2]. Findings and potential interventions
should be discussed in the clinical context
Evidence: [EL2]
Statement 3.11*
Immunosuppressive therapy should not be discontinued in IBD patients with intestinal CMV reactivation in general
[EL3]. Steroids should be tapered [EL4]. Antiviral therapy should be considered in steroid-refractory IBD patients
with CMV colitis [EL3]. Discontinuation of immunosuppressive therapy is recommended in symptomatic
disseminated CMV infection [EL 4]
Evidence: [EL3], [EL4], [EL3]
Statement 3.12*
EBV is associated with an increased risk of lymphoma in EBV-negative patients on immunosuppressive therapy,
primarily thiopurines [EL4]. Use of thiopurines in EBV-IgG negative patients should be carefully considered [EL5]
Evidence: [EL4], [EL5]

-- 57 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 58
Statement 3.13*
Patients on immunosuppressive therapy are considered to have an enhanced risk for development of severe
influenza infection [EL5]. Annual influenza vaccination of patients on immunosuppressive therapy is recommended
according to national guidelines [EL5]. Live vaccines should not be administered to immunosuppressed patients
Evidence: [EL5], [EL5]
Statement 3.14*
Immunosuppressive therapy should be discontinued in severe cases of varicella infection, disseminated HSV and
VZV, symptomatic infectious mononucleosis, EBV-related mucocutaneous ulceration, and severe influenza [EL4].
Immunosuppressive therapy should be withheld in cases of measles [EL5]
Evidence: [EL4], [EL5]
Statement 3.15*
Immunosuppressed IBD patients with an ongoing HSV, VZV, or influenza infection should receive the appropriate
antiviral treatment [EL4]
Evidence: [EL4]
Statement 3.16*
Immunosuppressed female IBD patients should undergo annual cervical cancer screening [EL3]
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 3.17*
Routine prophylactic HPV vaccination is recommended for both young female and young male patients with IBD
[EL2]
Evidence: [EL2]
Statement 3.18
During the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, management of IBD should follow usual standards of care [EL5]
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 3.19
When COVID-19 is clinically suspected, or when a patient tests positive for SARS-CoV-2 [symptomatic or
asymptomatic], continuation of 5-ASA and immunosuppressive therapy should be considered on a case-by-case
basis according to current knowledge [EL 4]
Statement 4.1*
The reactivation risk of latent tuberculosis infection [LTBI] in patients treated with biologics or JAK inhibitors is
increased, and the disease can be more severe than in the background population [EL2]. Before its start and,
ideally, before any immunosuppression, IBD patients should be screened for LTBI [EL1]. Consider re-screening
patients previously exposed to biologics and JAK inhibitors before switch or swap [EL3]. Under special conditions,
re-screening during anti-TNF agent therapy and JAK inhibitors should be considered [EL5]
Evidence: [EL2], [EL1], [EL3], [EL5]
Statement 4.2
LTBI should be diagnosed by a combination of patient clinical data and epidemiological factors, chest X-ray, and
tuberculin skin test [TST] or interferon-gamma release assay [IGRA] [or both] according to local availability and
national recommendations [EL5]
Evidence: [EL5]

-- 58 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 59
Statement 4.3
Patients diagnosed with LTBI before biologic or smallmolecule therapy or prolonged high-dose systemic steroids
should be treated with a complete therapeutic regimen for LTBI [EL1]. In other situations, specialist advice should be
sought. When there is LTBI and active IBD, biologic or small-molecule therapy should be delayed for at least 4
weeks after chemotherapy, except in cases of greater clinical urgency and with specialist advice [EL5]
Evidence: [EL1], [EL5]
Statement 5.1*
Pneumococcal vaccination should be recommended for all patients with IBD [EL3]
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 5.2*
Patients with IBD on immunosuppressive therapy with pneumonia should be tested for Legionella pneumophila
[EL4]. In case of Legionella pneumophila infection, immunosuppressive agents should be temporarily withheld until
resolution of active infection [EL5]
Evidence: [EL4], [EL5]
Statement 5.3*
Patients receiving immunosuppressive agents are at risk of more severe infections with Salmonella enteritidis and S.
typhimurium [EL4] and systemic and central neurological infections with Listeria monocytogenes.[EL4] The
incidence of L. monocytogenes infections appears higher in patients treated with anti-TNF agents compared with
other immunosuppressive agents [EL4]. Immunosuppressive therapy should be temporarily withheld until resolution
of the active infection [EL5] For IBD patients, invasive Salmonella spp. infections related to immunosuppressive
therapy have been reported.327–337 Definitive diagnosis is made by isolating Salmonella spp. from blood, stool, or
urine. Salmonellosis is treated with antibiotics such as fluoroquinolones or third-generation cephalosporins. In cases
of S. typhimurium osteomyelitis,338 aortitis,339 or septic arthritis,340,341 a combination of antibiotics and surgical
treatment may be required. Immunosuppressants should be temporarily withheld until resolution of active infection.
Immunosuppressive therapy is considered to confer a high risk for intestinal or systemic Salmonella spp.
infections.342–345 Immunosuppressive therapy is considered to confer a high risk for L. monocytogenes infection,
which causes primarily severe septicaemia and meningitis accompanied with considerable mortality.346 Compared
with other immunosuppressants, anti-TNF agents appear to confer a particular risk for serious
infection.327,347–361 Given that L. monocytogenes infections after infliximab treatment frequently occur after three
or fewer infusions, reactivation of latent infection could be considered. Treatment for L. monocytogenes consists of
ampicillin, amoxicillin, or case of allergy to penicillin, trimethoprim/ sulphamethoxazole [TMP-SMX]. Prevention of
Salmonella spp. and L. monocytogenes infections consists of food hygiene and careful food choices [such as
avoidance of raw eggs, unpasteurized milk, raw-milk cheese, and insufficiently cooked or raw meat]. Diagnosis is
made by appropriate microbiological blood and cerebrospinal fluid Gram staining and cultures. A high index of
suspicion is appropriate for patients on immunosuppressive therapy who present with signs and symptoms of
meningitis or other neurological symptoms. Comprehensive investigation, including lumbar puncture, should be
performed as soon as such symptoms develop.353 This may lead to early diagnosis and treatment, which is
important given the pathogenicity of L. monocytogenes. No conclusive data are available on whether
immunosuppressive should be temporarily or indefinitely withheld in the event of active infection. Nevertheless,
Evidence: [EL4], [EL4], [EL4], [EL5]
Statement 5.4*
Screening for C. difficile infection [CDI] is recommended at every disease flare in patients with IBD and especially in
patients receiving immunosuppressive therapy [EL3]
Evidence: [EL3]

-- 59 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 60
Statement 5.5
Diagnosis of CDI requires documentation of toxigenic C. difficile in stool accompanied with diarrhoea. A two-step
algorithm with a highly sensitive test such as glutamate dehydrogenase [GDH] antigen enzyme immunoassay or
nucleic acid amplification tests should be used initially, followed by a second test with high specificity, such as toxin
A/B enzyme immunoassays [EL3]
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 5.6*
Oral vancomycin and fidaxomicin for 10 days are equally effective in treating non-severe CDI [EL1]. For severe CDI,
intravenous metronidazole should be added to oral vancomycin for 10 days [EL3]. Treatment of CDI recurrence
includes oral vancomycin, fidaxomicin, faecal microbiota transplantation [EL3], and bezlotoxumab [EL5]. In CDI, use
of immunosuppressants can be maintained after careful risk-benefit evaluation and clinical judgement [EL5]
Evidence: [EL1], [EL3], [EL3], [EL5], [EL5]
Statement 5.7
Background: see Supplementary material, available as Supplementary data at ECCO-JCC online.
Statement 5.8
Meningococcal vaccination should be administered to patients with IBD as per regional or national
recommendations for the general population [EL5]
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 6.1
The risk of fungal infection in IBD is low. Systemic infections are exceptional, but mortality is high [EL4]. Apart from
Pneumocystis jirovecii, chemoprophylaxis is not indicated. Chemoprophylaxis following systemic fungal infection
should be discussed with an infectious disease specialist [EL5]
Evidence: [EL4], [EL5]
Statement 6.2
Screening for parasitic or fungal infections should be considered in residents of endemic areas or with relevant travel
history [EL5]
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 6.3
For patients with IBD on triple immunosuppressive therapy [including steroids, methotrexate, thiopurines, biologics],
standard prophylaxis with TMP-SMX should be strongly considered [EL4]. For those on double immunosuppressive
therapy, prophylactic TMP-SMX may also be considered, especially if one of these is a calcineurin inhibitor [EL4].
TMP-SMX should also be considered for any combination of high-dose corticosteroids, low lymphocyte count, or
JAK inhibitors [EL5]
Evidence: [EL4], [EL4], [EL5]
Statement 7.3
Intake of probiotics in patients receiving anti-TNF agents is probably safe, but safety may be a concern for probiotics
with beta-haemolytic activity [EL5]
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 7.1*
Given the lack of data, it is currently not possible to advise against travelling to countries with increased infection
rates. However, pre-travel counselling regarding safety measures is strongly recommended for patients under
immunosuppression travelling to endemic areas [EL4]. Specific travel recommendations from national authorities
and the World Health Organization should be consulted [EL5]
Evidence: [EL4], [EL5]

-- 60 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 61
Statement 7.2
Patients with IBD, including those on immunosuppressive therapy, do not appear to be at increased risk for
acquiring malaria or for a more severe disease course and should follow standard guidelines for prevention [EL5]
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 8.1*
Live vaccines in patients with IBD receiving immunosuppressive therapy are generally considered unsafe. It is
recommended to wait for at least 1–6 months after termination of immunosuppressive therapy before administration
of a live vaccine [EL5]. The decision to administer any live vaccine should be considered on a case-by-case basis
[EL5]
Evidence: [EL5], [EL5]
Statement 8.2
Before initiation of treatment, preferably at the time of IBD diagnosis, a standardised checklist regarding infection
risk and immunisation status should be completed [EL5]
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 8.3
Risk of M. tuberculosis infection is increased in healthcare workers with IBD on anti-TNF agents [EL4]. Regular
testing for TB is advised for healthcare workers [EL5]. Vaccination programmes for routine and specific vaccines
should be closely followed [EL5]
Evidence: [EL4], [EL5], [EL5]

-- 61 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 62
KNOWLEDGE BASE - SOCIETY GUIDELINES
ECCO Consensus on Management of Inflammatory Bowel Disease in Low- and
Middle-Income Countries
File: 9. ECCO_IBD in low and middle income countries.pdf
El-Hussuna A et al. J Crohns Colitis. 2025. doi:10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjaf125
37 rules extracted
Statement 1
Although reliable data on the incidence and prevalence of IBD in LMICs is limited, the rates suggest an increasing
incidence in regions where data are available [EL3]. Supporting text Incidence and prevalence rates (PR) of IBD in
low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) are typically reported by country or region. Between 1986 and 2005,
Brazil reported incidence rates (IR) per 100,000 person-years ranging from 0.74–6.76 for ulcerative colitis (UC),
0.24–3.50 for Crohn’s disease (CD), and 0.42–1.75 for unclassified inflammatory bowel disease (IBDU) (12). By
2015, the IR had increased to 8.00 for UC and 5.48 for CD (7). In Colombia, the UC IR increased from 5.59 in 2010
to 6.3 in 2017, and the CD IR decreased from 1.29 in 2010 to 0.74 in 2018.(13) Mean annual IR of UC in Argentina
and Panama was
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 2
Limited data from LMICs show regional differences in IBD hospitalization rates and mortality. Mortality rates are
influenced by access to timely surgical interventions and complications like sepsis and thromboembolism [EL4].
Evidence: [EL4]
Statement 3
Targeted public health interventions focusing on modifiable risk factors, such as antibiotic use, smoking, lifestyle
habits, and dietary patterns, may be helpful in addressing the rising incidence and prevalence of IBD in LMICs [EL4].
Supporting text Modifiable factors Diet In Iran, higher total fat intake was associated with an increased UC risk (odds
ratio [OR]: 2.46, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.37–6.35),(34) while higher dietary calcium intake was protective
[OR: 0.08, 95% CI: 0.02-0.27].(35) A prospective cohort study conducted in 21 low-, middle-, and high-income
countries revealed that higher intake of ultra-processed foods was associated with an increased risk of IBD (hazard
ratio [HR]: 1.82, 95% CI: 1.22–2.72 for ≥ 5 servings/day).(36) Hygiene
Evidence: [EL4]

-- 62 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 63
Statement 4
Disease and sociodemographic characteristics of adult and paediatric IBD populations vary across LMICs [EL3].
Conducting population-based studies on IBD populations from LMICs will help improve awareness of potential
differences in these characteristics [EL3]. Supporting text Studies from the US showed that the UC:CD ratio was
similar in African Americans compared with whites, but a higher proportion of UC was observed among Hispanic and
Asian populations, ranging from 52–80%.(55, 56) UC was more frequent than CD in Latin America(57, 58), but CD
was more frequent in the Caribbean region.(58) In India, UC is more common in the North and CD in the South.(59)
Age at diagnosis Individuals from Asia, Middle East, and Latin America were older at CD or UC diagnosis compared
with whites and African Americans.(55, 56, 60, 61) In southeast Asia, the median age at UC diagnosis was 35– 42
years, which is later than CD [31–34 years].(62) In Latin America, the mean age at diagnosis ranged from 31–41.7
years.(57, 58) In Turkey, the mean age at diagnosis was 42.6 years for UC and 37.4 years for CD.(63) The mean
age at IBD onset was 9.07 years [UC: 7.73 years, CD: 10.18 years; p < 0.001] in Asian children.(64) Sex distribution
IBD was significantly more prevalent in African American females compared with whites and Hispanics [63% vs
51.5% and 45.6%, respectively], but no sex differences were observed among whites and Hispanics.(55, 56) Studies
from South Asia, Southeast Asia, and the Middle East reported more male than female patients with IBD. In India,
Bangladesh, and Nepal, the male: female ratio was 1.6:1.(62) The proportion of males ranged from 27.4–47.1% in
Latin America (57) and the Caribbean.(58) Disease location and behaviour in CD
Evidence: [EL3], [EL3]
Statement 5
There is a need to develop educational programs for primary healthcare providers to facilitate prompt referral of
patients to specialist care, with the aim of preventing diagnostic delay and starting effective treatment to prevent IBD
complications [EL4]. Supporting text In many LMICs, healthcare curricula lack training on IBD, leaving practitioners
with limited knowledge. As a result, IBD may be frequently misdiagnosed and clinical supervision and laboratory
facilities necessary for proper patient monitoring may be lacking. A study reviewed online web-based e-learning
tools with easy access to up-to-date IBD educational materials as resources for physicians and patients worldwide. It
showed that locally trained physicians have limited knowledge on IBD. IBD is not included in the training Core
Curriculum in most of the participating countries. The healthcare approaches, both at the primary care and referral
levels, many times lack the essential regular clinical guidance.(78) A common deficit in knowledge on IBD
complications was found in countries such as Iran and Sri Lanka. Unemployed or lesser-educated patients in Sri
Lanka had significantly poorer knowledge on IBD than those employed or better educated.(79, 80) For example, the
former had lack of knowledge on colorectal cancer risk and surgical interventions. In LMICs, public health may
prioritize infectious diseases over IBD. Most diarrhoeal diseases are presumed to be of infectious cause at the
primary healthcare level, which delays referral to a specialist and diagnosis of IBD.(10) The disparity between
population size and health expenditures may for example result in a very low health expenditure per
Evidence: [EL4]
Statement 6a
Available guidelines for the management of IBD are based on studies from HICs [EL1]. There is a need to develop
locally applicable guidelines to address the specific needs of IBD care in LMIC settings [EL4]. Supporting text In
2010, the World Gastroenterology Organization Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of IBD
provided recommendations to account for variations observed in some LMICs.(81) In Latin America, guidelines were
developed for IBD diagnosis and management, endoscopy, special situations, and quality indicators for IBD
clinics.(82-86) In Asia, recommendations and consensus statements were established on definitions, diagnosis,
medical management, and monitoring.(87-89) Consensus statements were prepared in India focused on diagnosis
and treatment of IBD.(90-95) As existing guidelines are primarily based on studies from HICs, they may, therefore,
insufficiently consider the unique challenges and resource constraints faced by LMICs. Region-specific guidelines
adapted to LMIC settings would improve their relevance and applicability to address local needs, manage resource
limitations, and improve outcomes.
Evidence: [EL1], [EL4]

-- 63 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 64
Statement 6b
There have been good attempts to build IBD registries in LMICs [EL3]. Financial and technical support from
governmental and non-governmental organizations to develop IBD registries in LMICs can aid in understanding the
burden of IBD and enhance IBD quality of care [EL3]. Supporting text In Iran, a project was started in 2019 to gather
detailed data on patients with IBD.(96) As the first IBD registry in the Middle East, this may become a reliable
resource for national and international research on IBD.(97) In Africa, a prospective observational registry was
started in 2020 in Harare, Zimbabwe, to provide data on the burden, disease phenotype, and outcomes of IBD.(98)
In Asia, a multicentre registry of paediatric IBD from Thailand showed clinical and demographic characteristics of
this disease.(99) The
Evidence: [EL3], [EL3]
Statement 7
The incidence and prevalence of opportunistic infections are high in IBD patients from LMICs treated with biologics,
immunosuppressive drugs, and steroids [EL3]. There is a need to develop pharmacovigilance strategies to mitigate
these risks [EL5]. Supporting text A meta-analysis of six cohort studies revealed a pooled IR of herpes zoster in IBD
of 10.41. IBD was associated with an increased risk of developing herpes zoster [incidence rate ratio: 1.68, 95% CI:
1.53– 1.84].(101) Elderly IBD patients treated with biologics were at increased risk of developing serious infections
[RR: 2.70, 95% CI:1.56–4.66] and opportunistic infections [RR: 3.16, 95% CI: 1.09–9.20].(102) A study from China
showed current and past HBV infection was detected significantly more often in individuals with IBD [41.2%] than in
the general population.(103) Another study from China found that severe disease activity, elevated levels of faecal
calprotectin [FC], and immunosuppressive medications, especially when used in combination, were risk factors for
opportunistic infections in patients with IBD. (104) Two studies from Brazil reported risk factors associated with latent
tuberculosis [TB], such as patient age, disease duration, gender, hospitalization in the last 12 months, workplace
[enclosed], and duration of medication use [anti-TNF agents such as adalimumab or infliximab].(105, 106) A study
from Mexico found that the frequency of cytomegalovirus [CMV] infection was 17% in toxic megacolon and
steroid-refractory UC.(107) In the Middle East, a study from Iran reported a prevalence rate of microsporidia
infection of 12.7%, with IBD patients undergoing treatment with immunosuppressive, corticosteroid, or
immunomodulator agents more susceptible to intestinal microsporidia infection.(108) A study from India reported a
high risk of TB during infliximab therapy despite TB screening.(109) A meta-analysis found a pooled prevalence of
TB in IBD of 0.08% [95%CI: 0.05–0.10%]. The pooled prevalence was 0.02% [95% CI: 0.02–0.03%], 0.21% [95%
CI: -0.02–0.43%], and 1.59% [95% CI: 1.19–
Evidence: [EL3], [EL5]
Statement 8a
Infectious aetiologies that mimic IBD, in particular TB, amoebiasis, Salmonella, Shigella, Yersinia, Strongyloides
stercoralis, and HIV-related infections, should be considered and excluded in the diagnosis of IBD in LMICs [EL3].
Supporting text Infectious colitis should be considered when diagnosing IBD in LMICs due to the high prevalence of
infections, such as TB, amebiasis, and others, which can mimic IBD. The overlap of symptoms, particularly between
CD and GITB, presents a significant diagnostic challenge. Misdiagnosis can lead to severe consequences, including
inappropriate treatments that could exacerbate the condition. Physicians can avoid delays in appropriate diagnosis
and treatment by excluding key infections like TB, Yersinia, and Strongyloides. However, in recent years, there has
been an increase in the number of patients with IBD, including CD, in newly industrialized countries like China and
India.(112) A recent study from India reported that IBD accounts for more than 5% of patients presenting with lower
gastrointestinal symptoms, a rate higher than that of infectious colitis.(113) Therefore, while infectious causes
should be excluded, this approach must be balanced with timely IBD diagnosis to avoid unnecessary delays in care.
A detailed patient history, including recent travel, antibiotic use, and exposure to infectious agents, is crucial.
Intestinal infections can cause colitis, and ileocolonic ulcers can be seen in GITB(114) Ileitis, resulting from Yersinia
and Salmonella infections.(114) TB is considered endemic in most of LMICs, and
Evidence: [EL3]

-- 64 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 65
Statement 8b
In LMICs, infectious causes should be considered for each disease relapse. We suggest all patients with acute
colitis flares should have stool testing for amoebiasis, stool cultures for bacterial infections, and possible
Clostridioides difficile infection based on region-specific prevalence [EL3]. Supporting text In resource-limited
countries, infectious causes should be excluded from each disease relapse. The risk of enteric infections is higher in
patients with IBD than in controls. Entamoeba histolytica [EH] is an intraluminal parasite that can cause symptomatic
disease characterized by abdominal pain, cramps, and bloody diarrhoea. Amebiasis can also exacerbate IBD
symptoms, as demonstrated in a report by Babic et al., who found EH or Entamoeba dispar in 19/119 [16.0%] cases
of IBD flares.(118) A systematic review that identified 24 cases of severe and fulminant amoebic colitis treated with
corticosteroids revealed that 14/24 patients were mistaken for IBD and incorrectly treated with corticosteroids,
leading to rapid disease progression; nearly half of these patients underwent surgery, and a quarter of them
died.(119) The authors concluded that infection with EH should be considered before administering corticosteroids
to patients residing or travelling in endemic areas.(119)
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 8c
Stool PCR is the gold standard for diagnosing EH due to its high sensitivity and specificity [EL3]. However, in many
resource-limited settings where PCR may not be available, stool microscopy and serology can provide some
diagnostic utility, although their sensitivity and specificity are considerably lower [EL3]. Supporting text Amoebiasis is
endemic in developing parts of Central and South America, Africa, and Asia. Amoebiasis is caused by infection with
the protozoan parasite EH. Millions of people are infected with EH, making amoebic colitis a leading cause of
diarrhoea, and EH is estimated to kill more than 55 000 people each year.(124) The hallmark of amoebic colitis is
diarrhoea, which may be watery or bloody. The disease can be limited to the ascending colon or caecum, but may
also present similarly to IBD. Corticosteroid use is a risk factor for the development of fulminant forms of amoebic
colitis.(124) Several diagnostic modalities, including microscopy, antigen detection, molecular tests, and serology,
can assist with diagnosis. Stool microscopy allows for visualization of cysts and trophozoites by an experienced
observer. While readily available, stool microscopy has poor sensitivity and specificity and cannot differentiate
between Entamoeba spp. Microscopy should not be used when other modalities are accessible.(125) Serology is a
valuable adjunct to stool studies and has high sensitivity [65–92%] and specificity [> 90%]. Stool antigen detection
tests have variable sensitivity and specificity, particularly in
Evidence: [EL3], [EL3]
Statement 9a
Improving access to and expertise in ileocolonoscopy in LMIC settings will facilitate early and accurate diagnosis
[EL5]. Supporting text There are issues related to endoscopy access, especially advanced endoscopy, across
LMICs. The appropriate use of these limited resources is required to achieve a timely diagnosis of IBD. While
sigmoidoscopy may be useful in making an initial diagnosis of UC, mapping disease extent and dysplasia
surveillance require colonoscopy. Furthermore, sigmoidoscopy may be inadequate to assess disease activity in UC,
although it may be sufficient in those with limited disease extent.(128-130) There is a lack of access to endoscopy in
some regions of LMICs that may result in a diagnostic delay in IBD.(131, 132) Sub-Saharan Africa has low
endoscopic availability, especially in outlying rural areas. There are very few trained endoscopists and
gastroenterologists, and faulty equipment often cannot be repaired due to limited resources. Most endoscopy units
are in urban areas with long waiting lists for access, even for patients with suspected IBD.(133) Additional resources
include access to endoscopic balloon dilation for CD-related strictures, high-definition white light endoscopy for
dysplasia detection, and video capsule endoscopy [VCE] and device-assisted enteroscopy [DAE] for evaluating
small-bowel involvement in CD.(134-137) Access to small-bowel endoscopy is required to diagnose and manage
small-bowel disease. The options for small-bowel endoscopy include VCE and DAE. Centres caring for patients with
small-bowel CD should have access to one form of DAE [single- or double-balloon enteroscopy or spiral
enteroscopy].(138) There are challenges in using these modalities; DAE requires access to the specific device,
anaesthesia and
Evidence: [EL5]

-- 65 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 66
Statement 9b
The practices and availability of sedation during endoscopy in LMICs are variable. Sedation might be a preferable
option to encourage increased and better endoscopic examinations, and it should be guided by patient preferences,
pre-endoscopic assessment, and local resources [EL5]. Supporting text Sedation during gastrointestinal endoscopy
is a well-established practice with a focus on patient safety and comfort. The choice of sedative agents and the level
of sedation (deep sedation, moderate [conscious] sedation, or procedures without sedation) should be
individualized, considering patient-specific factors and procedural requirements.(144) However, even in developed
countries there is no consensus on the type and depth of sedation. Arguments against sedation include
cost-effectiveness, safety, patient turnaround, and patient preference.(145-147) There is a significant gap in
knowledge in LMICs regarding sedation practices. Sedation availability is variable in LMICs.(148) There is also
variability in access to anaesthetist- or nurse-driven sedation practices in endoscopy. Offering sedation often
requires the availability of anaesthesiologist support in case of complications or delayed recovery from anaesthesia.
Patient awareness and fear of the procedure in general and sedation itself are also significant issues that may
impact patient willingness to undergo a procedure, which may lead to delayed or missed diagnosis. Updated surveys
on patient awareness and preferences are advised.
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 10
There are several infectious diseases that can mimic IBD, and histological features may not be pathognomonic.
Granulomas, although suggestive, are not diagnostic of CD and have numerous differential diagnoses apart from
CD [EL3]. A comprehensive evaluation of clinical, radiological, histological, and microbiological evaluation helps
discriminate IBD mimics from IBD [EL3]. Supporting text Although IBD has no specific features, histology is an
important parameter for diagnosis. The histological assessment of IBD is based predominantly on disease activity
[epithelial damage, neutrophilic infiltration of epithelium, and crypts] and changes of chronicity [architectural
distortion of crypts, crypt loss]. Various scores used in both UC and CD typically consider these two parameters
along with some additional parameters [such as granuloma in CD, eosinophils, or lamina propria infiltrate].(149)
However, none of these parameters is specific to IBD. Several conditions can mimic IBD clinically [presenting with
chronic diarrhoea] and histologically. The presence of non-caseating granulomas favours the diagnosis of CD.
However, it is important to recognize that there are many differential diagnoses of granulomas.(150, 151) (152-156)
Granulomas can occur in CD and infectious colitis [GITB, Schistosoma, Yersinia, Paracoccidioides, histoplasmosis].
The frequency of granulomas reported in CD is variable; granulomas are more likely to be detected in resection
specimens than in endoscopic biopsies.(150) Furthermore, granulomas may be less common in delayed-onset
CD.(157) Fissuring ulcers and focal mucosal disease are suggestive of CD.(158) GITB, which can mimic CD, can
also present with granulomas. While caseating granulomas are specific to GITB, epithelioid granulomas can be
found in both conditions.(154) Large granulomas [> 400 μm], confluent or coalescing granulomas, and a higher
frequency of granulomas favours GITB.(153, 154, 159-162) Ulcers lined by a band of epithelioid histiocytes also
suggest GITB.(160) Other features that may suggest GITB are granulomas in the caecum and at multiple sites.(160)
Small granulomas, focally enhanced colitis, pericryptal granuloma, and deep ulcers suggest CD diagnosis over
GITB.(160) Schistosomal colitis can cause epithelioid granulomas, with excess mucus, nearly normal crypts
[occasionally crypt distortion], eosinophilic infiltration of the mucosa and submucosa, and occasionally the presence
of Paneth cell metaplasia. Sometimes, calcified or uncalcified ova may be visualized in mucosal biopsies.(163, 164)
Histoplasmosis can mimic IBD as it can cause an intestinal mass or ulcer-like lesions and histology may reveal
granulomas and histoplasma-invaded macrophages. Special stains, such as silver stain, best
Evidence: [EL3], [EL3]

-- 66 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 67
Statement 11a
In TB-endemic areas, misdiagnosis can be the most important single factor in diagnostic delay of CD [EL3].
Diagnostic delay is more common in LMICs and is associated with low awareness and limited resources, leading to
a more complicated disease course [EL3]. Supporting text The time to diagnose IBD in LMICs is greater than in
HICs, which may be due to differences in healthcare provision. In addition, the difficulty in differentiating between
IBD and more prevalent infectious diseases is a barrier to IBD diagnosis in LMICs.(179) A further reported barrier to
accurate diagnosis of IBD in LMICs is the perceived rarity of IBD and the consequent lack of clinical awareness,
leading to a lower index of suspicion.(179) Data from a multicentre study in Korea revealed that the mean interval of
diagnostic delay was 16.0 ± 33.1 months; however, this gap decreased significantly over time.(180) In many
resource-limited countries, several cultural barriers exist for colonoscopy. Disease is usually ignored for a long time
by patients before they seek medical attention due to the social stigma of chronic disease; accordingly, diagnosis is
delayed.(10, 181) Diagnostic delay in CD is associated with significantly higher stenotic complications and the need
for surgery. (181) Diagnostic delay in LMICs is usually multifactorial and related to inadequate disease awareness
and poor access to and low availability of diagnostic services. A study from India revealed that up to a third of
patients with CD are misdiagnosed as having GITB, and empirical anti-tuberculosis treatment [ATT] is the single
most significant contributor to diagnostic delay in TB-endemic areas.(181) Extreme delay in CD diagnosis can occur
due to the assumption of a GITB diagnosis and improvement of stricturing disease with surgery. These patients
likely present with complicated phenotypes of postoperative CD.(182) Increasing disease awareness and improving
local gastroenterology care by collaborations between gastroenterologists from LMICs can accelerate development
of comprehensive gastrointestinal care. The availability of and maintenance service for endoscopy equipment are
major challenges. Collaboration between the local community and non-profit organizations can be a sustainable
source of continual funding for gastrointestinal units.(182, 183)
Evidence: [EL3], [EL3]
Statement 11b
Differentiating between GITB and CD is a complex challenge due to overlapping clinical, radiological, and
histopathological features. A multifaceted approach using clinical, immunological, molecular, endoscopic,
radiological, histopathological, and microbiological assessments is essential to improve diagnostic accuracy [EL3].
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 11c
Screening for active or latent TB before starting an anti-TNF agent, other biologic therapies, or a small molecule
[immunosuppression] is essential in LMICs due to the high prevalence of TB in these regions. These therapies can
significantly increase the risk of reactivating latent TB, which can lead to severe complications. Although tests such
interferon-gamma release assays and tuberculin skin test have limitations, these tests play a crucial role in detecting
latent TB, with interferon-gamma release assays offering more specificity in TB-endemic areas [EL2].
Evidence: [EL2]

-- 67 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 68
Statement 11d
In TB-endemic regions where diagnostic uncertainty between GITB and CD exists after colonoscopy, histology,
microbiology, and a trial of ATT followed by a repeat colonoscopy after 2 months to assess response may be
considered [EL3]. Supporting text Screening for active or latent TB before starting treatment is essential. There is
currently no data to determine the utility of TB screening prior to initiation of corticosteroids. Distinguishing GITB
from CD is a significant clinical challenge due to the similarities between the two conditions and the high prevalence
of TB in LMICs. GITB and CD are both chronic granulomatous diseases with overlapping symptomatology and
radiological, endoscopic, and histopathological findings. (22)A South Korean study revealed that approximately 11%
of patients with GITB were misdiagnosed as having CD, while approximately 18% of patients with CD were
misdiagnosed with GITB.(184) Misdiagnosis and delayed treatment can have serious consequences with a risk of
disease progression, and starting ATT in patients with CD can have serious adverse effects. Furthermore, TB
dissemination may occur in patients receiving immunosuppressive treatment who have GITB misdiagnosed as
CD.(185) Making an accurate diagnosis as early as possible is essential to prevent complications. Differentiating
between GITB and CD requires a multifaceted approach using detailed history [travel history, recent antibiotic use,
exposure to TB] and a comprehensive clinical evaluation [including a chest X-ray] combined with an array of
auxiliary tests
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 12
The increased risk of TB reactivation in IBD patients treated with steroids and advanced therapies is of particular
concern in LMIC settings [EL2]. Supporting text Ileocolonic resection could be considered a viable first-line treatment
for CD, particularly in areas with a high prevalence of TB.(196) In clinical practice, approximately 1–3% of IBD
patients treated with antiTNF agents develop active TB even after a negative screening test. These findings have
been confirmed by reports from several Asian countries, including India, Japan, and South Korea. (197) The risk is
notably higher with anti-TNF agents when compared with other treatments, such as 5-ASA, corticosteroids, and
immunomodulators. Overall, there have been very few reported cases of TB associated with vedolizumab clinical
trials have reported only a few cases and post-marketing data also indicate a low risk, with seven cases of TB in
over 110 000 patient-years of exposure. There are no available data comparing the TB risk between antiTNF agents
and anti-integrin agents. Data on TB risk with newer biologics remain limited.(197) Data from non-IBD indications
also suggest that ustekinumab has a low risk of TB. (197) Data from non-IBD indications suggest an increased risk
of TB with tofacitinib, especially in TB-endemic regions.(198) Distinguishing GITB from CD remains challenging in
India, with 10–15% of cases misdiagnosed. Historically, patients were treated with ATT for years before a CD
diagnosis. Although improved diagnostics now allow for more accurate differentiation, nearly a third of patients with
CD still receive ATT before a correct diagnosis. TB is confirmed if endoscopic and histological improvements are
observed after ATT, while poor response may indicate CD or drug-resistant TB.(199)
Evidence: [EL2]

-- 68 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 69
Statement 13
Vaccinations against infectious diseases should be administered, preferably prior to starting immunosuppressive
therapy in LMICs [EL3]. However, the cost of vaccines, their availability, and local infection prevalence are particular
considerations in LMICs [EL5]. Supporting text In India, the vaccination rate of common vaccines [BCG, hepatitis B,
diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis, oral polio vaccine, and measles] is 81% and coverage with elective vaccines is
lower.(201) A study from India revealed that only 9.2% of patients with IBD had completed the hepatitis B
vaccine.(202) This suggests that vaccination in adult IBD patients is low in LMICs, such as India.(203) There are
only limited data in the literature to estimate the risk of infections in patients with IBD in LMICs. A study of 908
patients in north India revealed HBsAg positive status in 2.6%, 2.4% and 3% of patients with IBD, UC, and CD,
respectively.(204) A region-specific meta-analysis found that the prevalence of HBsAg positive status in patients
with IBD in India is 2.4% [range 1.4–3.4%].(205) Median anti-HBs titres were lower in patients with UC than controls
[67 IU/L vs 105 IU/L; p < 0.01].(206) Adequate and effective immune responses were significantly lower in patients
with UC than controls [82% vs 96%, p = 0.001; 41% vs 66%, p < 0.001]. Multivariate analysis revealed that
independent predictors of adequate immune response were non-exposure to therapies like steroids, thiopurines,
and biologicals, male gender, and early disease [disease duration < 5 years]. This suggests that all patients with
new diagnoses of IBD in LMICs should be offered vaccination against hepatitis B. A study from India on 41 patients
with CD revealed that all patients were positive for anti-hepatitis A antibodies, with similar titres as in controls.(207)
A meta-analysis in patients with IBD showed that the rates of hepatitis A seropositivity were the highest in Asia.(208)
Nearly a third of the patients had antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 in non-vaccinated patients with IBD from northern
India.(209) This suggests that although vaccination is warranted against COVID-19, a subset of patients from India
are already exposed to SARS-CoV-2. In Iran, rates of measles vaccination were 72.5% and 73.0% for patients with
CD
Evidence: [EL3], [EL5]
Statement 14
The evidence for the use of empiric antibiotics during IBD flares in LMICs is currently not available [EL5]. Supporting
text In a study from Iran, C. difficile and Staphylococcus aureus were found in the intestinal microbiota of 5.7% and
15.8% of patients with IBD flares, respectively.(217) Patients with UC who have intestinal colonization with
extended-spectrum β-lactamase producers had more severe disease.(218)
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 15
Access to modalities to monitor therapeutic response in IBD is suboptimal in LMIC settings [EL3]. Adoption of
non-invasive modalities, such as routine tests, faecal biomarkers, and intestinal ultrasound are suggested [EL3].
Supporting Text
Evidence: [EL3], [EL3]
Statement 16
Complementary and alternative medicine [CAM] for IBD treatment is frequently used in LMIC settings [EL4]. Further
evidence is required to characterize the efficacy and safety of CAM for IBD treatment [EL4]. Supporting Text
Traditional Chinese medicine [TCM] is one of the most developed and diversified complementary and alternative
medicine [CAM] approaches. Chinese herbal medicine [CHM] administered orally or by retention enema has shown
promise in managing IBD through various compounds that exhibit antiinflammatory effects in preclinical and clinical
studies. Mode of therapy, combining both systemic and
Evidence: [EL4], [EL4]
Statement 17a
Dietary therapies are a valid component of IBD management in LMIC settings [EL2] where expertise and therapies
are available [EL4].
Evidence: [EL2], [EL4]

-- 69 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 70
Statement 17b
Malnutrition and its impact should be addressed while instituting dietary therapies [EL3]. Supporting text Special
diets, such as exclusive enteral nutrition [EEN], specific carbohydrate diet, anti-inflammatory diet for IBD, and
fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides, and polyols [FODMAP], have positive effects on
IBD management.(3) Dairy restriction is a controversial approach for patients. In a study on 1888 participants [IBD: n
= 872, non-IBD: n = 1016] on the effect of dairy in IBD, dairy intolerance and lactase deficiency were more common
in participants with IBD [65.5% vs 46.1%; p = 0.0001]. The rates of gastrointestinal complaints among participants
with IBD who had no family history of lactase deficiency, history of food sensitivity, or both were 59.91% [p = 0.68],
52.87% [p = 0.98], and 50.33% [p = 0.99] respectively, and were similar to participants without IBD.(246) EEN has
been widely studied and is recommended as first-line therapy for inducing remission of luminal CD in paediatric
population. EEN is a nutritionally complete liquid diet, either polymeric or oligomeric [semi-elemental or elemental],
administered for 6–8 weeks through a nasogastric tube or orally.(247) The European Society for Pediatric
Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition recommends at least 6 weeks of EEN, even though the mucosa usually
heals after 8 weeks. Studies from India have shown positive results for EEN for CD and acute severe UC.(248, 249)
One-third of IBD patients experience irritable bowel syndrome-like symptoms. A recent meta-analysis confirmed that
a low-FODMAP diet reduced functional gastrointestinal symptoms, such as bloating. In healthy volunteers, the
mechanisms of action behind a low-FODMAP diet include decreased Bifidobacterium and reduced breath hydrogen.
(250)Elimination diets are not recommended and may lead to several nutritional deficiencies. Considering
malnutrition in IBD patients, nutrition education by
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 18
Non-adherence to medication is an underestimated problem in LMIC settings and has important consequences
[EL3]. Supporting text Poor adherence to medication is a major global issue. A World Health Organization report
revealed that the average medication adherence rate among patients with chronic diseases worldwide is
approximately 50%. The report emphasizes that as the number of individuals with chronic diseases increases, the
consequences of poor medication adherence become more severe. Non-adherence is a primary contributor to
preventable morbidity, mortality, and increased healthcare costs.(259)
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 19
Access to advanced therapies is limited in LMIC settings and should be improved [EL3].
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 20a
There are unique considerations, such as availability and cost, that favour wide use of thiopurines in LMIC settings
compared with HICs [EL3].
Evidence: [EL3]
Statement 20b
Although frequently used in LMICs, there is no evidence to support use of 5-ASA for CD and should be avoided
[EL3]. Supporting text The MIRACLE trial revealed that thiopurines along with 5-ASA are an effective maintenance
therapy for clinical remission after infliximab induction in steroid-refractory UC.(270) Corticosteroid-free sustained
clinical remission rates were at 68% at 1 year, 59% at 2 years, and 42% at 4 years. A study from India on 81 patients
with fistulizing CD [most patients had complex fistulae] revealed a complete response rate of 25% [IQR: 24–66] at
45 months of follow up after thiopurine monotherapy in a setting with limited biological availability.(271) A study on
115 patients with stricturing CD revealed that thiopurine monotherapy has a good shortterm response with a modest
long-term response.(272) The cumulative probability of maintaining response was 73% at 1 year, 40.7% at 2 years,
and 18.5% at 5 years. A quarter of patients with stricturing CD developed leukopenia. Overall, thiopurines had a
good sustained long-term response in a cohort of 988 patients with IBD.(273) Overall effectiveness of thiopurine at 5
and 10 years was 79% and 72% in UC, and 69% and 63% in CD, respectively. A study of 1093 patients with IBD
with 7 [range 4–12]
Evidence: [EL3]

-- 70 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 71
Statement 21
IBD patients from LMICs are underrepresented in clinical trials of advanced therapies [EL1].
Evidence: [EL1]
Statement 22
In LMICs, a significant proportion of abdominal operations for IBD are performed in emergency settings, which may
indicate delays in referral or economic constraints and may lead to poor outcomes [EL4]. Supporting text A
systematic review on the clinical characteristics of patients with UC in Asia revealed cumulative colectomy rates at 1
and 10 years of 2.4% and 7.6% in Hong Kong and 3.4% and 15.6% in Malaysia, respectively.(20) However, the
study did not distinguish between colectomies performed as emergency or elective procedures. A retrospective
study from a Brazilian centre reported that 68.9% of surgical procedures on patients with CD were performed in an
emergency setting [both abdominal and perianal procedures], with the most common indications being ileal
strictures and anorectal fistulae. Although this study did not present differences in short-term results based on
setting, it did show that emergency surgery was a predictor for surgical recurrence [Odds Ratio: 2.1, 95% CI:
1.6–6.6].(279) A retrospective study from India assessed outcomes of 72 patients with UC who had emergency
surgery and revealed an in-hospital postoperative mortality of 16.7%. The authors reported wound sepsis in 37.5%
of patients, fever in 27.8%, adhesive intestinal obstruction in 8.3%, pelvic sepsis in 6.6%, ileostomy-related
complications in 6.6%, blow out of Hartmann’s pouch in 6.6%, and continued rectal bleeding in 3.3% of patients. The
median duration of postoperative hospital stay was 10 days.(32) Another retrospective study from India presented
data on 223 patients with CD of which 32.7% had at least one surgical procedure. Although the study did not
distinguish between elective and emergency procedures, the analysis revealed male sex, small-bowel disease,
perianal disease, and disease behaviour as independent predictors for surgery.(280)
Evidence: [EL4]
Statement 23
The length of resected and remaining bowel segments in CD surgery is rarely reported in LMICs [EL5]. Structured
and standardized reporting of the length of resected and remaining bowel segments during CD surgery in LMICs is a
simple yet very useful improvement [EL4]. Supporting text In LMICs, where healthcare resources are often limited,
the precision of surgical interventions for IBD is paramount. Accurate measurement of resected and remaining bowel
segments plays a crucial role in reducing the risk of disease recurrence, particularly in patients with CD,(283, 284)
where inflammation can return at the site of anastomosis or other parts of the gastrointestinal tract.(285) Although
the role of surgeon experience and training is critically important in LMICs, many surgeons may not have access to
the same level of training and continuous professional development as their counterparts in HICs.(286) Resource
limitations [e.g. lack of electronic documentation] may further negatively affect the surgeon’s performance [e.g. the
meticulous measurements required during IBD surgery], leading to suboptimal outcomes. A systematic review that
included studies from HICs highlighted the critical nature of segmental resections in managing IBD-related colorectal
cancer and dysplasia. The review found that inadequate resection margins, often due to the absence of advanced
imaging and measurement tools, were associated with higher rates of metachronous cancer recurrence.(287) This
underscores the importance of precise measurements during surgery to reduce risk of recurrence. A systematic
review on surgery in CD concluded that an adequate report of resected small-bowel segments and length of
remaining small bowel is of critical importance [e.g. for any planning of repetitive surgical interventions and
subsequent management].(288) As there is no direct evidence from LMICs, recommendations must be carefully
developed based on existing guidelines.
Evidence: [EL5], [EL4]

-- 71 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 72
Statement 24
Surgical-site infections are the most frequent postoperative complications in LMICs [EL3]. The aetiology of these
complications is multifactorial [e.g. pre-existing malnutrition, ignorance of disease behaviour, or delay in surgery]
[EL3]. Supporting text Postoperative complications following IBD surgery remain a significant concern in LMICs.(8,
22, 289) A retrospective study from Iran al. used records from six tertiary care hospitals to explore in the outcomes
of adult patients with UC undergoing colectomy; of the 2933 admitted patients with UC, 4% needed colectomy and
as many as 40% experienced postoperative complications, with bowel obstruction and pouchitis being the most
common late complications.(290) Another retrospective study from a tertiary centre in China analysed the outcomes
of 35 adult patients with IBD [CD: n = 21, UC: n = 14] undergoing laparoscopic surgery. The study reported a 26.3%
morbidity rate for CD and 28.6% for UC, with complications such as wound infections [CD: 15.8%, UC: 16.7%] and
intestinal obstructions [CD: 5.2%, UC: 8.3%].(291) Another study from China examined the prevalence and risk
factors [e.g. male gender and disease behaviour] in the population studied. The authors recommended key
strategies in managing complications [e.g. improving preoperative nutritional status and conservative surgical
techniques].(292) A study from Brazil on 37 patients with CD (44 surgical procedures) revealed that 40.9% [18/44 ]
of surgeries resulted in complications, including fistulae in 34.1% [15/44], abscesses in 22.7% [10/44], and
anastomotic dehiscence in 11.3% [5/44]. Significant risk factors for these complications included longer disease
duration [p = 0.04], penetrating disease behaviour [p = 0.013], extended surgical duration, [mean 181.1 minutes, p =
0.016], and larger resected specimens [median 25 cm, p = 0.014].(293) A paediatric study on early and long-term
surgical outcomes and complications in a referral children’s hospital in Iran revealed that 21 paediatric IBD patients
underwent a variety of surgical procedures, primarily due to anaemia, intestinal bleeding, or failure to thrive. A high
rate of early postoperative complications was observed, including wound infections [23.8%] and pelvic abscesses
[14.3%], with some cases requiring reoperation. The long-term complication rate was 28.6% during follow up.
Predictors for long-term complications included lack of prior drug treatment and bleeding as surgical
indications.(294)
Evidence: [EL3], [EL3]
Statement 25
Adoption of Enhanced Recovery After Surgery [ERAS] programs remain a challenge in LMICs [EL4]. Wider adoption
of ERAS programs could significantly improve postoperative outcomes, especially in settings with limited resources
and high postoperative morbidity rates [EL5]. Supporting text Enhanced Recovery After Surgery [ERAS] programs
are multimodal perioperative care pathways designed to minimize physiological disturbance, thus facilitating early
recovery following major surgery. A systematic review of ERAS programs for IBD surgery revealed a benefit from
consistent adoption of this pathway.(300) While direct evidence of implementing such programs in LMICs is still
lacking, insights can be drawn from specific studies. For example, a study in India on surgical management of CD in
a tertiary care centre over an approximate 8-year period analysed the outcomes of 28 patients [male = 18, mean age
31.2 years] who underwent surgical resection for small-bowel involvement. Patients presented with complications,
such as subacute intestinal obstruction, fistulae, and perforations, which required either elective or emergency
surgeries. Notably, preoperative conditions such as anaemia, malabsorption, and growth retardation, along with use
of steroids and immunosuppressants, were identified as significant risk factors that adversely affected postoperative
outcomes, leading to complications such as anastomotic leak.(301) While this study did not specifically evaluate
ERAS protocols, it underscores the challenges faced in LMIC settings, particularly the high rates of postoperative
morbidity and the lack of structured recovery protocols. The findings highlight the critical need for improved
postoperative care and patient education in such settings. Investment in education and training is needed in LMICs
to implement ERAS programs. This will be economically beneficial in LMICs, as it will improve postoperative
outcomes and reduce costs.(302)
Evidence: [EL4], [EL5]
Statement 26
In refractory moderate-to-severe UC in LMICs, transitioning from medical to surgical management is indicated by
non-response to intensive medical therapies. Early surgical intervention can improve outcomes and reduce
mortality, especially in the presence of life-threatening complications such as colonic perforation, toxic megacolon,
or severe bleeding [EL3]. Close collaboration between gastroenterologists and surgeons is essential to improve
outcomes.
Evidence: [EL3]

-- 72 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 73
Statement 27
In LMICs, physical examination as a standalone diagnostic tool is commonly practiced to evaluate perianal CD.
Endoanal ultrasound is suggested as a less expensive alternative to pelvic magnetic resonance imaging, provided
there is sufficient availability and specific expertise [EL5]. Supporting text Of the few studies on available imaging
modalities for assessing perianal CD in LMICs, a multicentre audit from Colombia on 65 patients with perianal CD
revealed physical examination as the most common method for the initial diagnosis [61.5%]. Pelvic magnetic
resonance imaging [MRI] was performed in 27.7%, endorectal ultrasound [US] in 6.2%, and clinical examination
under anaesthesia in only 1 patient.(305) Two additional studies, one describing clinical and demographic
characteristics of IBD patients in an underdeveloped region in Brazil (306), and one reporting methods to
differentiate intestinal TB from CD in India,(199) did not discuss the available imaging methods to assess perianal
disease. A study from north India reported MRI features of 27 patients with perianal CD, focusing on clinical and
radiological characteristics and patient management; MRI was suggested as a mandatory imaging modality for all
patients with perianal CD.(307) Although a study on perianal fistulizing CD in India notes that endoanal US is less
expensive, this study did not provide any data on actual access to MRI or endoanal US in this setting.(308) Pelvic
MRI was the imaging modality used in a recent cross-sectional study from Brazil that evaluated the effect of
infliximab serum concentrations on disease activity in perianal fistulizing CD,(309) which was consistent with the
Brazilian Consensus Statement as of 2022. Based on a Delphi consensus considering expert and stakeholder
opinions, pelvic MRI was recommended to evaluate fistulizing perianal CD,
Evidence: [EL5]
Statement 28
In LMICs, sphincter-cutting techniques, such as fistulectomy, fistulotomy, and cutting seton are still widely used for
surgical management of complex perianal CD. However, recent studies have shown good results from the adoption
of sphincter-preserving techniques [EL4]. Supporting text Several studies from LMICs examined the use of cutting
seton and fistula plugs in anal fistula surgery. One study from a tertiary referral centre in Egypt described 7 patients
undergoing anal surgery for CD without providing further detailed information.(311) More detail was provided in a
relatively recent study from India (271) on 65 patients with CD, of whom 58% received at least one surgical
procedure, namely fistulectomy or fistulotomy, followed by seton placement. An alternative approach, videoassisted
anal fistula treatment, was used for only 18% of these patients. A multicentre study from Colombia on 65 patients
with perianal fistulizing CD revealed that 46% of these patients had a surgical procedure, namely mucosal flap
surgery [18.5%], ileostomy [13.8%], ligation of the internal tract [6.2%], closure of the internal orifice [4.6%],
temporary colostomy [4.6%], and definitive colostomy with proctectomy [4.6%].(305) A retrospective assessment
from a tertiary referral centre in Brazil,(312) including 625 patients with IBD [416 with CD], also provided some
information on patients with perianal CD who received relatively conventional procedures [e.g. fistulotomies and
setons]. Recently, there have been a few reports on newer methods. An expert group from a tertiary referral centre
in Malaysia used laser ablation of fistula tracts in 63 patients, of which 3 [4.3%] had IBD.(313) In a clinical
interventional study at an IBD referral centre in Iran, 5 adult patients with refractory disease and draining perianal
fistulae due to CD received mesenchymal stromal cells, injected locally and combined with fibrin glue, which was a
potentially safe and effective therapeutic approach. (271)Lastly, a narrative overview on current IBD therapies made
a specific point in identifying challenges for CD surgery in limited-resource settings in South Asia but did not address
surgical management of perianal CD in detail.(308)
Evidence: [EL4]

-- 73 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 74
KNOWLEDGE BASE - MEDICATION GUIDELINES
Optimizing 5-Aminosalicylate for Moderate Ulcerative Colitis: Expert Recommendations
from the Asia-Pacific, Middle East, and Africa IBD Coalition
File: 12. APMA_Moderate UC_Int research 2024.pdf
Akyuz F et al. Intest Res. 2024. doi:10.5217/ir.2024.00089
14 rules extracted
APMA Rec 1 (Moderate UC definition)
Moderate UC is defined as: 4–6 bowel movements/day, temperature ≤37.8°C, pulse ≤90 bpm, haemoglobin ≥10.5
g/dL, and CRP ≤30 mg/L (modified Truelove & Witts criteria). Clinical presentation, patient-reported symptoms, and
objective markers (FC, endoscopy) should also be considered in the full assessment.
APMA Rec 2 (Optimal 5-ASA dose for moderate UC: 4 g/day)
Optimal 5-ASA dose for induction of remission in moderate UC: 4 g/day oral 5-ASA [81% APMA expert consensus].
Doses less than 4 g/day are unlikely to achieve adequate response in moderate disease.
APMA Rec 3 (Topical 5-ASA for distal moderate UC)
Topical 5-ASA at ≥1 g/day is recommended for inducing remission in patients with DISTAL moderate UC
(proctosigmoiditis or proctitis). Combination of oral + topical 5-ASA is superior to either alone for distal disease.
APMA Rec 4 (5-ASA response: assess at 2–4 weeks)
Anticipated timeframe for initial clinical response to 5-ASA in moderate UC: 2–4 weeks. Formally assess response at
this point — do not wait beyond 4 weeks to classify as non-responder before considering therapy adjustment.
APMA Rec 5 (Corticosteroids: not added based on risk factors alone)
Oral corticosteroids should NOT be added to 5-ASA therapy based solely on one or more accepted risk factors for
aggressive disease in moderate UC. A full clinical risk assessment including disease burden, endoscopic severity,
and biomarkers is required before adding corticosteroids.
APMA Rec 6 (5-ASA optimisation steps before escalation)
Before escalating beyond 5-ASA in moderate UC, optimise therapy in a stepwise manner: (1) Maximise oral 5-ASA
dose to ≥4 g/day; (2) Add topical 5-ASA ≥1 g/day if distal disease; (3) Optimise patient adherence and extend
treatment duration to minimum 6 weeks; (4) Switch 5-ASA formulation (e.g., pH-release vs. time-release) if
tolerability issue.
APMA Rec 7 (Bridging if 5-ASA fails: budesonide MMX or corticosteroid)
If no response after optimised 5-ASA therapy in moderate UC: add-on oral budesonide MMX (9 mg/day) OR
systemic oral corticosteroid (≥40 mg/day prednisolone) as bridging therapy while planning further management.
[APMA Rec 13]
APMA Rec 8 (Predictors of aggressive disease: early immunomodulator or biologic)
Patients with predictors of aggressive disease in moderate UC should be considered for early immunomodulator or
biologic/advanced therapy, rather than extended corticosteroid use. Predictors of aggressive disease: early age at
diagnosis, extensive colitis, frequent flares requiring corticosteroids or hospitalisation, male gender, smoking,
concurrent PSC or other EIM.
APMA Rec 9 (Moderate UC relapse definition)
Relapse definition for moderate UC: recurrence of disease symptoms after achieving remission, including failure to
maintain rectal bleeding score = 0, stool frequency score = 0, or MES < 3 (Mayo Endoscopic Score).

-- 74 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 75
Statement 1
Assessing Moderate UC The APMA IBD Coalition members reached a unanimous consensus (100%) that moderate
UC is a unique phenotype of UC and warrants clinical attention. A proportion of the coalition further indicated that the
lack of timely and accurate risk stratification for patients may lead to consequences such as (1) suboptimal treatment
(95%) or a delay in treatment initiation or treatment escalation (89%) if the disease activity is un-
Statement 2
nTreatment of Moderate UC: Challenges and Unmet Needs The APMA IBD Coalition outlined key challenges to the
appropriate treatment of moderate UC, including a lack of clear treatment recommendations leading to delayed
intervention, particularly among gastroenterologists with limited exposure to UC in practice. In the APMA region,
variations in treatment accessibility, affordability, reimbursement policies, and eligibility criteria hinder a universal
approach to moderate UC.21,28 The panel indicated that ambiguous treatment pathways for moderate UC may lead
to (1) early and long-term exposure to adverse effects of advanced therapies (83%)20,21,26,47; (2) early and
long-term costs of biologics (72%)21,28; (3) treatment fatigue for patients (44%)48; and (4) early exhaustion of
biologics options due to loss of response (33%), as described earlier.32,33 The experts emphasized the need to
establish a treatment pathway for moderate UC that provides clear guidance on (1) the selection of induction
treatment, including dosage and duration, and administration route based on the location and extent of disease; (2)
risk stratifying strategies to identify the need to escalate therapy; and (3) de-escalation strategies upon achievement
of remission. However, such treatment guidelines must also account for patient heterogeneity in terms of treatment
history, clinical presentation, disease progression and treatment response. 1) Treatment Goals in Moderate UC
Statement 3
nTreatment of Moderate UC: Optimization of 5-ASA for Patients with Moderate UC Current guidelines recommend
conventional 5-ASAs as induction therapy for remission in patients with mild-to-moderate UC, followed by advanced
therapies if conventional therapies are no longer effective.1,2,59,60 Before a treatment is considered “ineffective,”
the physician should first ensure that the treatment has been correctly and fully utilized at the maximum dose and
optimum duration.17 Ultimately, these measures to improve the utilization of conventional medicines for moderate
UC may effectively conserve the use of advanced therapies for patients experiencing severe UC.17,45 The
optimization of 5-ASA therapy can be achieved by implementing measures suggested by the APMA IBD Coalition,
which have been modified based on strategies proposed in previous literature17,45: maximizing 5-ASA dosage,
incorporating topical therapy, enhancing patient adherence through education and by streamlining the dosing
strategy and delivery, and prolonging treatment duration. 1) Maximizing the 5-ASA Dose
Statement 4
nTreatment Escalation Beyond 5-ASA for Patients with Moderate UC When all available options for optimizing
5-ASA treatment have been exhausted, escalating to immunomodulatory agents and/or advanced therapies may be
considered,1,47 in alignment with guidelines that recommend escalation for patients with moderate-to-severe UC
with inadequate response or intolerance to conventional therapy.2 As per the STRIDE-II consensus
recommendations, 94% of the APMA IBD Coalition would define “inadequate response” to 5-ASAs for moderate UC
as a failure to attain a reduction ≥ 50% in rectal bleeding and stool frequency.49 Risk factors that were identified to
contribute to “inadequate response” to 5-ASA include (1) frequent symptom flares requiring corticosteroids or
hospitalization (89%); (2) extensive colitis (67%); (3) moderate endoscopic activity (39%); (4) young age at diagnosis
(33%); (5) concurrent PSC or other EIM (17%); (6) smoking (11%); and (7) male gender (6%).
Statement 5
A proposed treatment algorithm for moderate UC is presented in Fig. 1, which takes into account current practices
and recommendations of the APMA IBD Coalition.

-- 75 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 76
KNOWLEDGE BASE - MEDICATION GUIDELINES
Colitis and Crohn's Foundation (India) Consensus Statements on Use of
5-Aminosalicylic Acid in Inflammatory Bowel Disease
File: 13. Indian Consensus statement on 5ASA.pdf
Sood A et al. Intest Res. 2020;18(4):355-378. doi:10.5217/ir.2019.09176
58 rules extracted
Statement 5 (Assess response at Day 14)
Assess response to 5-ASA therapy at DAY 14. If no improvement in rectal bleeding and stool frequency by Day 14,
the patient should be classified as a non-responder and therapy should be escalated. Do not wait beyond 2 weeks to
classify as non-responder. [Grade B | EL I]
Statement 6 (Dose escalation for non-response)
Dose escalation to maximum 5-ASA dose of 4–4.8 g/day may be performed for patients not responding to lower
initiating doses before classifying as 5-ASA non-responders. [Grade B | EL I]
Statement 7 (Sulfasalazine preferred with peripheral arthritis)
Sulfasalazine (2–3 g/day) may be PREFERRED in IBD patients with concomitant PERIPHERAL ARTHRITIS —
sulfasalazine has DMARD (disease-modifying antirheumatic drug) activity. Avoid sulfasalazine for axial arthritis
(ankylosing spondylitis) — it is ineffective for this indication. [Grade C | EL III]
Statement 8 (5-ASA withheld in acute severe colitis)
In ACUTE SEVERE COLITIS: 5-ASA has NO proven role as adjunct therapy. 5-ASA should be WITHHELD during
IV corticosteroid treatment — approximately 3% of patients develop paradoxical worsening of diarrhoea on 5-ASA.
Reintroduce after clinical improvement. [Grade C | EL III]
Statement 10 (Induction dose for initial maintenance)
In mild-to-moderate UC, continue the induction dose of 5-ASA for INITIAL MAINTENANCE of remission. Do not
reduce dose prematurely before confirmed mucosal healing. [Grade B | EL I]
Statement 11 (Maintenance dose reduction in complete mucosal healing)
5-ASA maintenance dose REDUCTION can be considered in patients with a mild clinical course AND complete
mucosal healing confirmed by endoscopy (MES 0). Do not reduce dose in patients with ongoing endoscopic activity.
[Grade B | EL II-1]
Statement 14 (Proctitis: suppositories preferred; 1 g once daily)
For ulcerative proctitis: suppositories are preferred over enemas or foams for targeted drug delivery. Recommended
dose: 5-ASA 1 g once daily as a suppository.
Statement 15 (Proctitis maintenance: 3 g/week topical or low-dose oral)
Maintenance therapy for proctitis: 3 g weekly divided dose of topical 5-ASA OR low-dose oral 5-ASA (2–2.4 g/day).
Weekly topical dosing is as effective as daily dosing for maintenance.
Statement 16 (Rectal 5-ASA: first-line maintenance in proctitis)
Rectal 5-ASA is FIRST-LINE maintenance therapy in ulcerative proctitis. Oral 5-ASA alone is less effective than
rectal 5-ASA for proctitis.

-- 76 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 77
Statement 17 (Proctitis not responding: add topical corticosteroids)
Proctitis not responding to combined oral + rectal 5-ASA: add topical corticosteroids. Combination of
beclomethasone dipropionate (BDP) + 5-ASA enema is superior to either agent alone.
Statement 18 (5-ASA withdrawal: significant relapse risk)
Withdrawal of 5-ASA is associated with significant relapse risk. Complete withdrawal of 5-ASA is NOT
recommended unless the patient is intolerant. Some evidence suggests 5-ASA reduces colorectal cancer (CRC) risk
in extensive colitis. [Grade B | EL I]
Statement 19 (Proctitis with mucosal healing: oral can be stopped)
In ulcerative proctitis patients who have achieved complete mucosal healing: oral 5-ASA may be discontinued with
continuation of rectal suppositories alone. [Grade C | EL III]
Statement 20 (Sulfasalazine in mild-moderate COLONIC CD)
Sulfasalazine may be considered for induction of remission in mild-to-moderate COLONIC Crohn's disease [Grade B
| EL I]. Sulfasalazine is NOT effective for ileal or ileocolonic CD and should not be used for these disease locations.
Statement 21 (5-ASA NOT indicated for ileal/proximal CD)
5-ASA formulations are NOT indicated for induction of remission in ileal, ileocolonic, or proximal small intestinal
Crohn's disease. [Grade A | EL I]
Statement 22 (No role for 5-ASA maintenance in most CD)
There is NO role for 5-ASA or sulfasalazine in MAINTENANCE of remission in the MAJORITY of Crohn's disease
patients. [Grade A | EL I]
Statement 23 (5-ASA postoperative prophylaxis in CD after ileal resection)
5-ASA has a role in POSTOPERATIVE PROPHYLAXIS after ileal resection in Crohn's disease — it reduces clinical
and endoscopic recurrence rates compared with placebo. [Grade A | EL I]
Statement 24 (Paediatric: 5-ASA first-line in UC; indefinite use)
5-ASA is FIRST-LINE therapy for induction and maintenance of remission in children with UC [Grade A | EL I].
Continue indefinitely unless intolerant. Avoid withdrawing 5-ASA in paediatric UC without clear indication.
Statement 25 (Paediatric dosing)
Paediatric 5-ASA dosing: oral 5-ASA 60–80 mg/kg/day (maximum 4.8 g/day); rectal 5-ASA 25 mg/kg/day (maximum
1 g/day); sulfasalazine 40–70 mg/kg/day (maximum 4 g/day). [Grade B | EL I]
Statement 29 (Paradoxical worsening: 5-ASA hypersensitivity)
PARADOXICAL WORSENING (~3% of patients): some patients develop paradoxical worsening of colitis on 5-ASA
(increased abdominal pain, diarrhoea, rectal bleeding) — this is a drug hypersensitivity reaction, NOT disease
progression. Requires IMMEDIATE discontinuation of 5-ASA. Patient is allergic to 5-ASA — do NOT rechallenge.
[Grade A | EL I]
Statement 30 (5-ASA renal toxicity monitoring)
5-ASA may cause RENAL TOXICITY (interstitial nephritis). Monitor renal function (serum creatinine, eGFR) AT
LEAST ONCE A YEAR in all patients on long-term 5-ASA. Incidence: approximately 1/4,000 patients per year. Can
occur as early as 29 days or as late as 5 years after initiation. [Grade A | EL I]
Statement 31 (5-ASA in chronic renal failure)
5-ASA dose modification is NOT routinely required in chronic renal failure, but renal function must be monitored
MORE CLOSELY (every 3–6 months rather than annually). Weigh the benefit of 5-ASA against the risk of further
renal deterioration. [Grade C | EL III]

-- 77 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 78
Statement 33 (Folate supplementation required with sulfasalazine)
Folate supplementation is REQUIRED with SULFASALAZINE — sulfasalazine inhibits dihydrofolate reductase,
causing folate deficiency. Standard: folic acid 5 mg/day. Pregnant women on sulfasalazine: folic acid 2 mg/day
minimum. Other 5-ASA formulations do NOT require routine folate supplementation. [Grade B | EL II-3]
Statement 34 (Long-term 5-ASA may reduce CRC risk in UC)
Long-term 5-ASA therapy in extensive/distal colitis is POSSIBLY associated with a reduced risk of colorectal cancer
(CRC) in UC — approximately 37–54% relative risk reduction [Grade B | EL II-1]. This is a further reason to maintain
long-term 5-ASA and avoid complete withdrawal.
Statement 35 (Adherence critical: non-adherence 3x relapse risk)
Patient ADHERENCE to 5-ASA therapy is critically important. Non-adherent patients are approximately 3 times
MORE LIKELY to relapse than adherent patients [Grade B | EL II-2]. Patient education about the importance of
continuous therapy is MANDATORY at every clinical encounter.
Statement 1
5-ASA containing formulations are effective for induction of remission in patients with mild to moderate UC of any
extent and are the first line of treatment for this indication. • nGrade of recommendation: A, Level of evidence: I,
Voting: 87.5% strongly agree, 12.5% agree Two RCTs conducted in 1960s have shown that sulfasalazine (2–4
g/day) was more effective than placebo in induction of remission. However, it was not well tolerated due to adverse
events and high rates of discontinuation were observed.22,23
Statement 2
In mild to moderate UC, 5-ASA (2–4.8 g/day) or sulfasalazine (3 g/day) should be given for induction of remission. •
nGrade of recommendation: A, Level of evidence: I, Voting: 78.3% strongly agree, 21.7% agree The Assessing the
Safety and Clinical Efficacy of a New Dose of 5-ASA (ASCEND) trials were a series of dose-finding trials for 5-ASA
in UC. A pooled analysis of 3 ASCEND trials showed no significant difference between 4.8 g/day and 2.4 g/day in
Statement 3
In distal or extensive mild to moderate UC, combination of topical and oral 5-ASA formulations is preferred over oral
5-ASA alone. • nGrade of recommendation: A, Level of evidence: I, Voting: 91.7% strongly agree, 4.2% agree, 4.2%
disagree A systematic review and meta-analysis of 4 RCTs found combined topical and oral 5-ASAs to be superior
to oral 5-ASA alone in inducing remission in mild to moderate active leftsided UC, proctosigmoiditis, and proctitis
(RR of no remission, 0.65; 95% CI, 0.47–0.91).31 Another systematic review and network meta-analysis (n = 8,020
patients with extensive or leftsided mild to moderate UC) reported that combined oral and rectal 5-ASA agents were
superior to standard dose oral 5-ASA (2–3 g/day) for induction of remission (failure to induce remission with
combined oral and rectal 5-ASAs; odds ratio [OR], 0.41; 95% CI, 0.22–0.77).24 Active comparisons of efficacy and
tolerability showed that combined oral and rectal 5-ASAs were significantly superior to all other interventions for
inducing remission in mild to moderate UC, except budesonide multi-matrix.24 In the surface under the cumulative
ranking curve analysis (SUCRA), combined oral and rectal 5-ASAs ranked highest in inducing remission (SUCRA,
0.99) followed by high-dose 5-ASA (SUCRA, 0.82).24 Considering 13% median remission rate for placebo across
trials, approximately 63%, 33%, and 26% of patients treated with combined oral and rectal 5-ASA, high-dose and
standard-dose 5-ASA, respectively, are expected to achieve clinical remission.24
Statement 4
Once daily dose of oral sustained release preparation should be considered as it is equally effective as divided
doses. • nGrade of recommendation: A, Level of evidence: I, Voting: 72.0% strongly agree, 28.0% agree New, once
daily (OD) formulations of 5-ASA use multi-matrix technology which involves incorporating 5-ASA into a lipophilic
matrix, which itself is dispersed within a hydrophilic matrix, to delay and prolong the dissolution.32 Two Cochrane
systematic reviews have demonstrated no significant difference between OD versus conventional dosing for
induction of

-- 78 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 79
Statement 5
A period of 2 weeks of 5-ASA therapy should be given before considering a patient as a nonresponder. • nGrade of
recommendation: B, Level of evidence: I, Voting: 80.0% strongly agree, 20.0% agree While selecting 5-ASA for
induction of remission in patients with UC, the timing at which clinical response is evident also needs to be
considered. Nonresponders to the recommended 5-ASA induction doses should be identified early, and therapy
escalation should be considered in such cases. Based on ASCEND (4.8 g/day, 800 mg tablet) I and II trials,
symptoms of rectal bleeding and stool frequency either improved or resolved by day 14 in the majority of patients on
both 4.8 g/day and 2.4 g/day of 5-ASA (73% vs. 61%, respectively). By day 14, symptom resolution was seen in
43% versus 30% of patients on 4.8 g/day versus 2.4 g/day dose (P = 0.035). Moreover, relief in symptoms after 2
weeks correlated with high rate of relief in symptoms after 6 weeks.36 Hence, patients should be assessed at day 14
for therapeutic decision making.
Statement 6
Dose escalation to a maximum dose of 4–4.8 g may be done for patients who do not respond to lower initiating
doses of 5-ASA compounds. • nGrade of recommendation: B, Level of evidence: I, Voting: 76.0% strongly agree,
24.0% agree In the ASCEND I trial, subgroup analysis of patients with moderately active disease revealed that
higher dose of 5-ASA was better by an absolute difference of 15% in achieving therapeutic success (72% vs. 57%, P
= 0.038).37 ASCEND II confirmed a statistically superior effect of the 4.8 g/day over the 2.4 g/day dose in
moderately active disease (72% overall response vs. 59%, respectively)38 and ASCEND III showed a significant
benefit of 4.8 g/day versus 2.4 g/day in patients with difficult to treat UC, specifically those who required cortico-
Statement 7
Sulfasalazine may be preferred in patients with concomitant arthralgia/arthritis. • nGrade of recommendation: C,
Level of evidence: III, Voting: 100.0% strongly agree Articular involvement is the most common extraintestinal
manifestation in IBD, with a prevalence ranging between 17% and 39%.40 It frequently involves the axial joints but
can also be associated with peripheral arthritis. Peripheral arthritis has 3 subtypes: type 1, pauciarticular, joint
activity parallels intestinal disease activity, type 2, polyarticular form, affecting small joints with symptoms running
independent from IBD course, and type 3, which includes both axial and peripheral forms.41-43 The approach to
management of arthritis in patients with IBD is similar to that in treatment of spondyloarthritis. While the treatment of
axial arthritis focuses on combination of exercise and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NASIDs), selective
conventional non-biologic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) are used for peripheral arthritis
resistant to initial NSAID therapy, if biologics are not already required for axial or gastrointestinal disease
manifestations.44 Sulfasalazine is one such DMARD, which is an azo-bonded combination of 5-ASA and
sulfapyridine. It is often poorly tolerated due to adverse effects (due to the sulfapyridine moiety) such as headache,
nausea, vomiting, drug rash, hepatitis, and hematologic toxicity. This limits its use in IBD, for which safer 5-ASA
compounds have been developed. However, an Italian Expert panel has recommended 2–3 g/day of sulfasalazine in
mild to moderate IBD with peripheral arthritis and early disease that failed on intra-articular corticosteroids.45 On the
other hand, the Assessment in SpondyloArthritis international Society and European League Against Rheumatism
do not
Statement 8
In acute severe colitis, 5-ASA has no proven role as an adjunct therapy. 5-ASA should be introduced after clinical
improvement. • nGrade of recommendation: C, Level of evidence: III, Voting: 59.3% strongly agree, 33.3% agree,
7.4% disagree Acute severe UC is a medical emergency with high mortality. Intravenous corticosteroids remain the
cornerstone of treatment, as they act rapidly and are effective in up to 70% of the patients.47,48 5-ASAs can be
temporarily withdrawn while the patients are being treated with intravenous corticosteroids, as there is no evidence
supporting benefit of these drugs in acute severe UC. Conversely, a paradoxical increase in diarrhea has been
reported in 3% patients on 5-ASAs.48,49 However, topical 5-ASA or corticosteroids may be added in patients who
have high stool frequency.20 After an initial response to the intravenous corticosteroids, patients can be switched to
oral corticosteroids, and 5-ASA, azathioprine, or 6-mercaptopurine can be added.50 2. Role of 5-ASA in
Maintenance of Remission in UC

-- 79 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 80
Statement 9
Long-term 5-ASA is indicated for maintenance of remission in patients with UC. • nGrade of recommendation: A,
Level of evidence: I, Voting: 100.0% strongly agree
Statement 10
In patients with mild to moderate UC, the dose that was used for induction of remission should be continued for initial
maintenance of remission. • nGrade of recommendation: B, Level of evidence: I, Voting: 53.8% strongly agree,
23.1% agree, 23.1% disagree The safety and efficacy of long-term use of 5-ASA as a maintenance therapy has
been studied in several studies and its continued use is known to prevent disease relapse in patients with UC.9,10 A
Cochrane review of 38 studies (n = 8,127) assessed efficacy, dose-responsiveness, and safety of oral 5-ASA for
maintenance of clinical or endoscopic remission in UC. Forty-one
Statement 11
5-ASA maintenance dose reduction can be considered in patients with UC having mild clinical course with complete
mucosal healing. • nGrade of recommendation: B, Level of evidence: II-1, Voting: 73.1% strongly agree, 19.2%
agree, 7.7% disagree Mucosal healing in UC is associated with improved clinical outcomes in terms of lower relapse
rates,53-55 lesser requirement for immunosuppressive agents,56 fewer hospitalizations and colectomies,56,57
lower risk of colorectal cancer58-60 and improved quality of life.61,62 Achieving complete mucosal healing should,
therefore, be the primary endpoint of treatment. Besides mucosal healing, various factors including adherence to
treatment, duration of disease in remission, degree of mucosal healing (complete/partial), and clinical course should
be considered before reducing the maintenance dose of 5-ASA. No difference in the long-term risk of flare was
noted between low (2.4–2.8 g/day) versus high (4.4–4.8 g/day) dose 5-ASA in patients who adhere to treatment.63
Data from an IBD registry showed that a longer duration ( > 2 years) of disease remission correlated with a lower risk
of relapse (P < 0.001).64
Statement 12
For patients with moderate to severe UC who required corticosteroids for induction of remission, 5-ASAs can be
used for maintenance. • nGrade of recommendation: B, Level of evidence: II-2, Voting: 96.4% strongly agree, 3.6%
agree Use of corticosteroids for inducing remission is associated with an increased risk of subsequent clinical
relapses.69 Studies evaluating outcomes after systemic corticosteroid use have shown that up to 30%–40% patients
subsequently require medical rescue therapies or colectomy.70-72 In a cohort of UC patients treated with 5-ASA
after a course of oral systemic corticosteroids, 75% patients relapsed (median, 29 months; range, 1–156 months),
and 14% required colectomy (median, 11 months; range, 1–24 months). Kaplan Meier curve showed relapse and
colectomy rates over 1 year
Statement 15
Patients with proctitis can be maintained with 3 g weekly divided dose of topical 5-ASA or low dose of oral 5-ASA (2–
2.4 g daily). • nGrade of recommendation: A, Level of evidence: I, Voting: 55.6% strongly agree, 40.7% agree, 3.0%
strongly disagree
Statement 14
In patients with proctitis, suppositories should be preferred over enemas or foams. • nGrade of recommendation: A,
Level of evidence: I, Voting: 88.9% strongly agree, 11.1% agree Recommended dosage of topical therapy with
5-ASA suppository for induction of remission is 1 g OD. • nGrade of recommendation: A, Level of evidence: I,
Voting: 92.3% strongly agree, 7.7% agree

-- 80 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 81
Statement 16
Rectal 5-ASA is first-line maintenance therapy in ulcerative proctitis. An RCT with 95 ulcerative proctitis patients
found 5-ASA suppositories at a dose of 1 g thrice a week to be more effective than placebo in maintaining
remission.78 Another RCT reported a significantly higher relapse rate at 12 and 24 months with placebo as
compared to OD 500-mg 5-ASA suppository (P < 0.001).79 A systematic review and meta-analysis evaluating
topical 5-ASA therapies for maintenance of remission in ulcerative proctitis also reported the benefit of rectal 5-ASA
(pooled RR, 2.80; 95% CI, 1.21–6.45; degree of heterogeneity [I2], 66%; P = 0.02).80 Another recent meta-analysis
including 7 RCTs (n = 555), showed that topical 5-ASA was effective in preventing relapse of distal UC.81 The
superiority of rectal 5-ASA over placebo for maintenance of remission at 1 year was also demonstrated in a recent
Cochrane review (RR, 2.22; 95% CI, 1.26–3.90).82 Two RCTs have compared combination treatment with oral
5-ASA plus intermittent 5-ASA enema and oral 5-ASA alone, for maintenance of remission. One compared patients
who received 1 g 5-ASA enemas twice a week plus oral 5-ASA 3 g/ day for 7 days with daily oral 5-ASA only and the
other compared combined therapy with 5-ASA tablets 1.6 g/day and
Statement 17
In patients with proctitis not responding to oral and rectal 5-ASA, topical corticosteroids can be added for inducing
remission. • nGrade of recommendation: A, Level of evidence: I, Voting: 76.0% strongly agree, 24.0% agree Two
meta-analyses have shown that topical 5-ASA is more effective than topical corticosteroids, in inducing
symptomatic, endoscopic, or histological remission.97,102 However, in patients not responding/intolerant to 5-ASA
(topical, oral or a combination of both) within 2–3 weeks of initiating therapy, combination therapy of topical 5-ASA
and topical corticosteroids can be considered.94 A randomized, double-blind trial demonstrated higher efficacy of
beclomethasone dipropionate (BDP) and 5-ASA enema combination therapy (BDP/5-ASA) versus BDP or 5-ASA
alone. The combination was significantly superior to single-agent therapy in terms of improved endoscopic and
histological scores.103
Statement 18
Withdrawal of 5-ASAs is associated with a significant risk of relapse. Decision to withdraw should only be made after
several factors are taken into consideration such as duration of remission and mucosal healing. • nGrade of
recommendation: B, Level of evidence: I, Voting: 42.9% strongly agree, 46.4% agree, 10.7% disagree Multiple
factors determine the duration of treatment with 5-ASA. A recent Cochrane review suggested that 5-ASA was
superior to placebo as a maintenance therapy in UC.82 These findings endorse a lifelong approach to therapy with
5-ASA in UC. However, dose reduction after induction of remission has been evaluated in various studies. In a
real-world OPTIMUM study, no difference was found between reduced dose and maintained dose for maintenance
of remission after induction. Also, maintenance of remission was noted to be significantly better than placebo in
patients in whom duration of remission was > 12 months (hazard ratio [HR] for relapse, 0.600; 95% CI, 0.486–0.740;
P < 0.0001 for > 12 months and HR, 0.352; 95% CI, 0.289–0.431; P < 0.0001 for > 24 months). 5-ASA therapy was
not withdrawn in any of the patient.104 In a retrospective Korean study, left-sided or extensive colitis at time of
diagnosis (HR, 1.46; 95% CI, 1.01–2.10; P = 0.04) was observed to be independent predictor for clinical relapse on
5-ASA therapy.105 Although 5-ASA preparations are generally well tolerated, adverse reactions including worsening
colitis; nephrotoxicity, interstitial lung disease, bronchiolitis obliterans, pancreatitis, hair loss, and Stevens-Johnson
syndrome have been described.106 These can also be major determinants in deciding continuation or withdrawal of
the therapy. Mucosal healing (endoscopic/histological) also predicts the subsequent clinical course. Narang et
al.107 showed that histological remission predicts a sustained clinical remission (87.1% patients in histological
remission remained asymptomatic at 1 year). Another RCT showed that 5-ASA dose reduction is more successful in
sustaining remission if a Mayo endoscopic sub-score of 0 is achieved.66 Attainment of mucosal healing might help
decide upon the withdrawal or discontinuation of the drug. Complete withdrawal of 5-ASA agents is currently not
recommended unless the patient is intolerant as there is some evidence that regular 5-ASA reduces the risk of
colorectal cancer.68

-- 81 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 82
Statement 19
In patients with proctitis with mucosal healing, oral 5-ASA may be discontinued with continuation of rectal
suppositories. • nGrade of recommendation: C, Level of evidence: III, Voting: 92.6% strongly agree, 7.4% agree A
meta-analysis involving 3,977 patients on oral 5-ASA (granules and tablets) and 2,513 patients on rectal 5-ASA
(suppositories, enema, and foam) demonstrated that mucosal healing rates are superior with rectal formulations
(36.9% and 50.3% for patients treated with oral and topical mesalamine, respectively).91 Another systematic review
by Ford et al.81 that studied the relative efficacies of different routes of administration of 5-ASA agents also
concluded that intermittent topical 5-ASAs are superior to oral 5-ASA in maintaining remission in quiescent UC.
Though there is no direct evidence showing the benefit of discontinuing oral 5-ASA and continuing suppositories in
patients with proctitis who have achieved mucosal healing, the expert panel recommends that oral 5-ASA may be
discontinued with continuation of rectal suppositories in such patients. 5. Role of 5-ASA in CD
Statement 20
Sulfasalazine may be considered for induction of remission in mild to moderate colonic CD. • nGrade of
recommendation: B, Level of evidence: I, Voting: 37.5% strongly agree, 54.2% agree, 8.3% disagree A Cochrane
meta-analysis has evaluated the role of aminosalicylates in induction of remission or response in CD. A pooled
analysis of 3 studies108-110 showed that sulfasalazine was not superior to placebo for induction of remission or
response at 17 to 26 weeks of follow-up (RR, 1.52; 95% CI, 0.95– 2.43; P = 0.08); however, because of sparse data
and heterogeneity the results had low quality of GRADE evidence.108 A subsequent comparison of 2 RCTs.109,110
after removing the source of heterogeneity revealed a favorable response with sulfasalazine over placebo after
17–18 weeks of follow-up (RR, 1.38; 95% CI, 1.00–1.89; P = 0.05; zero heterogeneity; and moderate quality of
evidence). There was no difference in adverse events between sulfasalazine and placebo arms.108 The benefit
however was limited to patients with Crohn’s colitis. Those patients with small bowel disease or those who continued
to have active disease even after previous corticosteroid and sulfasala-
Statement 21
5-ASA formulations are not indicated for induction of remission in ileal/ileocolonic/proximal small intestinal CD. •
nGrade of recommendation: A, Level of evidence: I, Voting: 63.0% strongly agree, 22.2% agree, 11.1% disagree,
3.7% strongly disagree Comparison between sulfasalazine and corticosteroids showed that sulfasalazine
monotherapy was inferior to corticosteroids at 17–18 weeks of follow-up (RR, 0.68; 95% CI, 0.51–0.91; P = 0.009;
moderate quality of evidence due to sparse data).108 Another pooled analysis showed that controlled release
5-ASA (1–2 g/day) was not superior to placebo at 16 weeks of followup (RR, 1.46; 95% CI, 0.89–2.40; P = 0.14).
There was no difference in proportion of patients having adverse effects.108 A pooled analysis of 3 studies
comparing 5-ASA (4 g/day) with placebo showed a nonsignificant mean difference in Crohn’s Disease Activity Index
(CDAI) reduction (–19.8 points; 95% CI, –46.2 to 6.7; P = 0.14); another comparison of delayed release 5-ASA
(3–4.5 g/day) with tapering dose conventional corticosteroids showed no significant difference in efficacy after 8–12
weeks of follow-up (RR, 1.04; 95% CI, 0.79–1.36).108 Comparison of 5-ASA 4 g/day with budesonide 9 mg/day
showed that 5-ASA was significantly less effective than budesonide at 16 weeks (RR, 0.56; 95% CI, 0.40–0.78; P <
0.001).108 There was significant difference in proportion of patients experiencing adverse effects, however, more
patients withdrew from 5-ASA arm due to adverse effects. Another trial corroborated these findings when olsalazine
2 g/day led to a higher withdrawal rate, mainly due to diarrhea, as compared with placebo (P = 0.015).108 Although
the Cochrane analysis has limitations of sparse data, trial heterogeneity and high risk of bias, yet, it has been
sufficiently demonstrated that sulfasalazine was modestly effective, with benefit confined to Crohn’s colitis; and there
is no proven role of 5-ASA in induction of remission in ileal/ileocolonic/proximal small intestinal CD.
Statement 22
There is no role of 5-ASA or sulfasalazine in maintenance of remission in a majority of patients with CD. • nGrade of
recommendation: A, Level of evidence: I, Voting: 50.0% strongly agree, 37.5% agree, 12.5% disagree The efficacy
of sulfasalazine or 5-ASA in maintaining remis-

-- 82 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 83
Statement 23
5-ASA has a role in postoperative prophylaxis following ileal resection in CD. • nGrade of recommendation: A, Level
of evidence: I, Voting: 56.5% strongly agree, 39.1% agree, 4.3% disagree A Cochrane systematic review of 23
RCTs that investigated medical therapies for postoperative CD recurrence reported that clinical recurrence and
severe endoscopic recurrence reduced significantly with 5-ASA as compared with placebo (RR for clinical
recurrence, 0.76; 95% CI, 0.62–0.94; number needed to treat [NNT] = 12; RR for severe endoscopic recurrence,
0.50; 95% CI, 0.29–0.84; NNT = 8). Risk of serious adverse events was lower with 5-ASA versus
azathioprine/6-mercaptopurine (RR, 0.51; 95% CI, 0.30–0.89) but risk of any endoscopic recurrence was higher
(RR, 1.45; 95% CI, 1.03–2.06). 5-ASA therapy did not differ significantly from azathioprine/6-mercaptopurine for any
other outcome.49 Another Cochrane systematic review of 9 RCTs found that 5-ASA was significantly more effective
than placebo in postoperative prophylaxis of CD (OR, 0.68; 95% CI, 0.52–0.90), but there was no difference in
efficacy between 5-ASA and thiopurines (OR, 1.08; 95% CI, 0.63–1.85).114
Statement 24
5-ASA agents are the first line therapy for induction and maintenance of remission in children with UC. • nGrade of
recommendation: A, Level of evidence: I, Voting: 70.8% strongly agree, 29.2% agree, 4.2% disagree 5-ASAs are
recommended as first-line therapy for induction and maintenance of remission of mild to moderate UC in
children.115,116 5-ASA therapy should be used for maintenance indefinitely unless intolerant, as it is highly effective
and has a good safety profile. A prospective cohort study successfully reported clinical remission at week 3 in 42%
pediatric patients treated with the combination of 5-ASA oral and enema (1 g/day).117 In a randomized,
double-blind, active control study, pediatric UC patients treated with high and low-dose 5-ASA for a period of 6
weeks demonstrated similar efficacy in improving Pediatric UC Activity Index (55% vs. 56% of the patients in high-
and low-dose of 5-ASA, respectively) (P = 0.924) as well as Truncated Mayo score (70% vs. 73%).118 An RCT
comparing efficacy of once and twice daily dosing of 5-ASA in inducing remission in children with UC did not find any
significant difference in the rates of induction of remission (60% vs. 63%, P = 0.78).119 A meta-analysis including 37
RCTs revealed that 5-ASA is highly effective for induction of remission (RR of no remission 0.79 with 5-ASAs; 95%
CI, 0.73–0.85; NNT = 6). Higher effect was observed at ≥ 2.0 g/day dose (RR, 0.91; 95% CI, 0.85–0.98).120
However, there is no increase in remission rates at doses of > 2.5 g/day. 5-ASA is also effective in preventing
relapse of quiescent UC as compared to placebo (RR of relapse, 0.65; 95% CI, 0.55– 0.76; NNT = 4). Doses ≥ 2.0
g/day were more effective in preventing relapse as compared to < 2.0 g/day (RR, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.64–0.97).120 A
multicenter, double-blind study on 68 patients with mild-to-moderate active UC in the age range 5 to 17 years,
reported an achievement of clinical improvement in 45% and 37% of patients who received 5-ASA agent (oral
balsalazide) 6.75 and 2.25 g/day, respectively while clinical remission was seen in 12% and 9% of patients
respectively. The study supported the tolerability and safety profile of 5-ASA and its role in clinical remission in
pediatric UC patients.121 In another multicenter, randomized, double-blind study, 39% pediatric mild to moderate
UC patients clinically improved with olsalazine and were asymptomatic after 3 months, com-
Statement 25
Suggested dosing is oral 5-ASA 60 to 80 mg/kg/day to 4.8 g daily; rectal 5-ASA 25 mg/kg up to 1 g daily;
sulfasalazine 40–70 mg/kg/day up to 4 g daily. • nGrade of recommendation: B, Level of evidence: I, Voting: 72.7%
strongly agree, 27.3% agree An RCT enrolled 83 pediatric patients (age group: 5–17 years) who were treated with
low dose delayed release 5-ASA viz. 27–71 mg/g/day and high dose delayed release 5-ASA viz. 53– 118 mg/g/day.
Both low- and high-dose arms demonstrated similar efficacy in 81 of 83 modified intent to treat population in short
term treatment of mild to moderate active UC.118 In another Phase I RCT, 52 children with UC, aged 5 to 17 years,
and stratified by weight (18–82 kg), received multi-matrix 5-ASA at doses of 30, 60, or 100 mg/kg/day OD (maximum
4,800 mg/day) for 7 days. Children and adolescents with UC had pharmacokinetic profiles of 5-ASA and metabolite
acetyl5-ASA similar to historical adult cohort.125 Children can therefore receive a dose that is similar to the adult
dose. In an open-label trial 5-ASA 500 mg suppository daily at bedtime was found to be efficacious and safe in
children with ulcerative proctitis.123 5-ASA enemas in the dose of 25 mg/kg (up to 1 g) daily for 3 weeks along with
oral dose, can induce clinical remission and response in 42% and 71% pediatric UC patients, respectively, after 3
weeks.117

-- 83 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 84
Statement 26
Treatment with 5-ASA or sulfasalazine, if effective, should be continued during pregnancy as available evidence
does not suggest adverse fetal outcomes. • nGrade of recommendation: A, Level of evidence: I, Voting: 77.3%
strongly agree, 22.7% agree
Statement 27
5-ASA is safe in lactating mothers. • nGrade of recommendation: C, Level of evidence: II-3, Voting: 68.0% strongly
agree, 32.0% agree Breast feeding might be protective against early onset IBD.131 Sulfasalazine is of low risk
during breastfeeding as confirmed by multiple prospective clinical trials.132 Though sulfapyridine moiety is absorbed
in minimal amounts and is excreted in breast milk, the milk/serum ratio is acceptable.131,133 7. Side Effects and
Monitoring of 5-ASAs
Statement 28
5-ASA is well tolerated by most patients. • nGrade of recommendation: A, Level of evidence: I, Voting: 100%
strongly agree A systematic review and meta-analysis showed that the likelihood of experiencing any adverse event
with 5-ASAs was not statistically different when compared with placebo both for induction of remission (10 RCTs:
RR, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.81–1.29) and in prevention of relapse (5 RCTs: RR, 0.98; 95% CI, 0.84–1.15).120 A Cochrane
systematic review with 53 RCTs of parallel design, with minimum treatment duration of 4 weeks (n = 8,548)
concluded that the difference in incidence of adverse events with 5-ASA agents and placebo did not reach statistical
significance. However, sulfasalazine was not as well tolerated by the patients as 5-ASA (29% vs. 15% experiencing
adverse events:
Statement 29
Paradoxical worsening of colitis may occur on initiation of 5-ASA due to drug hypersensitivity and requires
discontinuation of the drug. • nGrade of recommendation: A, Level of evidence: I, Voting: 66.7% strongly agree,
33.3% agree A systematic review of 46 randomized trials on short-term adverse effects of 5-ASA agents in UC
reported that approximately 3% of patients on oral 5-ASA agents develop paradoxical worsening of their symptoms
such as abdominal pain, diarrhea and blood in stools, and cramping.134 Symptoms usually disappear when 5-ASA
agents are discontinued. These patients should be considered allergic to 5-ASAs, drug should be withdrawn, and no
5-ASA preparation should be used in these patients.134 The precise mechanism of exacerbation of colitis induced
by 5-ASA is not clear. Scheurlen et al.135 mentioned that diarrhea caused by 5-ASA was attributed to a secretory
mechanism secondary to inhibition of ileal and colonic Na + K + ATPase. Another proposed mechanism is an
alteration of arachidonic acid metabolism manifesting as secretory diarrhea and malabsorption.
Statement 30
5-ASA may cause renal toxicity and therefore monitoring of renal function should be carried out at least once in a
year. • nGrade of recommendation: A, Level of evidence: I, Voting: 63.6% strongly agree, 31.8% agree, 4.5%
disagree Nephrotoxicity is a rare adverse effect of 5-ASA therapy. Muller et al.136 reported the incidence of
nephrotoxicity in patients with IBD taking 5-ASA to be about 1/4,000 patients/year. Another systematic review
reported less than 0.5% incidence of nephrotoxicity in patients with IBD consuming 5-ASA.137 5-ASArelated
nephrotoxicity includes interstitial nephritis, glomerulonephritis, and minimal-change nephropathy with nephrotic
syndrome.138 Renal impairment is reported to occur as early as within 29 days and as late as 5 years;136,139 50%
of cases present within 1 year of treatment initiation.137 No relationship between type/dose of 5-ASA therapy and
development of renal disease has been reported. The time of diagnosis of 5-ASA nephrotoxicity and subsequent
discontinuation of drug determines the course of renal impairment.140 A review showed that if 5-ASA-associated

-- 84 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 85
Statement 31
Dose modification is not required in chronic renal failure except that renal function should be monitored more
closely. • nGrade of recommendation: C, Level of evidence: III, Voting: 52.0% strongly agree, 44.0% agree, 4.0%
disagree Patients with preexisting renal dysfunction may be more likely to suffer 5-ASA nephrotoxicity than those
with normal renal function.143 There is lack of RCT on the safety of 5-ASA agents in IBD patients suffering from
chronic kidney disease.137 IBD patients are more susceptible to renal damage during acute exacerbations, such as
during an acute episode of diarrhea.137 Therefore, IBD patients with chronic kidney disease need close
monitoring,144 especially in acute exacerbations of disease, in case of 5-ASA induced nephrotoxicity, and in
patients with comorbid conditions known to affect renal functions, such as diabetes and hypertension.137,145-147
Statement 32
Although sulfasalazine has the potential to cause decreased fertility in men, 5-ASA formulations do not affect fertility
in men or women. • nGrade of recommendation: B, Level of evidence: II-1, Voting: 47.6% strongly agree, 42.9%
agree, 9.5% disagree Various studies have shown the reversible adverse effect of sulfasalazine therapy on fertility in
males with IBD. However, no such effects were observed on fertility of female patients. Infertility due to sulfasalazine
in males is attributed to its sulfapyridine component rather than 5-ASA, the therapeutically active component.
Sulfasalazine leads to changes in sperm morphology, decreased sperm motility and sperm
count.127-129,131,133,148 Birnie et al.149 reported abnormal semen production and oligospermia in 86% and 72%
patients respectively, treated with sulfasalazine. However, infertility in males is reversible and preventable by
switching sulfasalazine to other 5-ASA formulations.6,150 Absence of sulfapyridine moiety in the newer 5-ASAs
Statement 33
Folate supplementation is required with use of sulfasalazine, other 5-ASA formulations do not require it. • nGrade of
recommendation: B, Level of evidence: II-3, Voting: 62.5% strongly agree, 29.2% agree, 4.2% disagree, 8.3%
strongly disagree Sulfasalazine therapy is known to decrease folate synthesis by inhibiting dihydrofolate reductase
and reducing folate absorption. These effects are not observed with other 5-ASA formulations.129,152,153 Folic
acid supplementation in sulfasalazine treated pregnant women, decreases the incidence of oral clefts, fetal neural
tube defects and cardiovascular anomalies in newborns.129,152 Pregnant women with IBD being treated with
sulfasalazine should receive higher doses of folic acid (2 mg/day) than pregnant women without
IBD.128,131,133,150 8. Chemopreventive Role of 5-ASA
Statement 34
Long-term 5-ASA therapy in extensive/distal colitis is possibly associated with reduced risk of colon cancer in UC. •
nGrade of recommendation: B, Level of evidence: II-1, Voting: 26.9% strongly agree, 57.7% agree, 15.4% disagree
A systematic review (6 case-control studies) showed that 5-ASA use in IBD patients may have chemopreventive
effect. Four of the 6 studies exhibited significant risk reduction with 5-ASA (P < 0.05), while risk reduction in the
other 2 studies did not reach significance.154 Qiu et al.155 in their systematic review and meta analysis (26
observational studies; 15,460 patients) also reported significant decrease in colorectal cancer (CRC) in UC patients
(OR, 0.46; 95% CI, 0.34–0.61) but not in CD patients (OR, 0.66; 95% CI, 0.42–1.03). 5-ASA use correlated
significantly with CRC (OR, 0.54; 95% CI, 0.39–0.74) but not with dysplasia (OR, 0.47; 95% CI, 0.20–1.10). The
meta-analysis further showed significant protective effect of 5-ASA only in clinical studies (OR, 0.51; 95% CI,
0.39–0.65) and not in population-based studies (OR, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.46–1.09). Another systematic review and
meta-analysis of 17 observational case-control, retrospective cohort, population- and hospital-based studies showed
that the use of 5-ASA correlated with reduced risk of CRC in UC (OR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.48– 0.84).156 The
chemopreventive efficacy of 5-ASA increased with higher average daily dose (sulfasalazine ≥ 2 g/day and

-- 85 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 86
Statement 35
Adherence to 5-ASA therapy improves outcome in patients with IBD. Hence, patient education is important. •
nGrade of recommendation: B, Level of evidence: II-2, Voting: 56.5% strongly agree, 39.1% agree, 4.3% disagree
Adherence to medication plays a significant role in the management of IBD as patients need long-term therapy.
Non-adherence lowers the effectiveness of treatment and also increases cost of therapy. Non-adherence to therapy
is a major concern. A self-reported survey from India revealed that 81% of patients were non-adherent to treatment,
defined as taking 80% or less of the dose advised. The reasons for non-adherence (not mutually exclusive) were
forgetfulness (77%), felt better (14.2%), high frequency of doses (10.1%), no effect of medications (7.9%), and
non-availability of medications (2.3%). Non-adherent patients were three times more likely to develop a relapse as
compared to those with adherence (OR, 3.38; 95% CI, 1.29–8.88; P = 0.012).159 In contrast, another study from
northern India (266 IBD patients) showed that more than 80% of patients were adherent to their medications,
adherence being the least for topical therapy. Higher education, professional occupation, and upper socio-economic
status were associated with lower adherence to medications.160 Two cohort studies found that non-adherent
patients are likely to experience greater risk of disease relapse compared to those who are adherent (HR, 5.5; 95%
CI, 2.3–13; P < 0.001 and RR, 1.44; 95% CI, 1.08–1.94; P = 0.014, respectively).161,162 Although there is paucity
of data on the impact of health ed-

-- 86 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 87
KNOWLEDGE BASE - MEDICATION GUIDELINES
Use of Thiopurines in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: An Update
File: 14. Thiopurines_Arshadeep, Peddi et al..pdf
Singh A et al. Intest Res. 2021;19(3):269-285. doi:10.5217/ir.2020.00155
43 rules extracted
Statement 8a (NHL: commonest malignancy; risk in elderly)
Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) is the commonest malignancy associated with thiopurine therapy — mainly in
elderly patients. Risk decreases gradually after thiopurine withdrawal. Risk-benefit discussion is mandatory in
patients over 65 years.
Statement 8b (HSTCL: combination therapy + young males)
HEPATOSPLENIC T-CELL LYMPHOMA (HSTCL): a peripheral T-cell lymphoma occurring in YOUNG MALES
receiving COMBINATION therapy with thiopurines + anti-TNF agents for ≥2 years. This is a rare but typically FATAL
malignancy. Counsel patients on this risk before initiating or continuing combination therapy.
Statement 8c (Thiopurines in EBV-seronegative patients: avoid)
Thiopurines increase the risk of primary EBV infection in seronegative patients, which can progress to aggressive
and fatal lymphoma. THIOPURINES SHOULD BE AVOIDED IN EBV-SERONEGATIVE PATIENTS — alternative
therapies should be used. Check EBV serostatus before starting thiopurines.
Statement 8d (Other malignancy risks: NMSC, cervical cancer)
Other malignancy risks associated with thiopurines include: increased risk of non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) —
particularly squamous cell carcinoma — and uterine cervical cancer. Annual skin surveillance and regular cervical
screening are required.
Statement 3 (Thiopurines in elderly: effective but higher risk)
Thiopurines in the ELDERLY (≥60 years): well-tolerated and as efficacious as younger patients for maintenance of
IBD remission. However, comorbidities limit use (drug-drug interactions) and elderly patients are at INCREASED risk
of infections, lymphoma, and hepatotoxicity with thiopurines. Benefit-risk discussion is essential. Monitor closely.
Statement 4 (Thiopurines in children: second-line; adverse effects common)
Thiopurines in PAEDIATRIC IBD are RESERVED AS SECOND-LINE therapy due to an unfavourable safety profile.
Adverse effects occur in 15–28% of paediatric IBD patients; up to 18% require discontinuation. Paediatric patients
are at increased risk of HSTCL, particularly males on combination therapy.
Statement 5a (Combination IFX+AZA superior to monotherapy)
Combination therapy of thiopurines + infliximab (IFX) is SUPERIOR to either therapy alone in inducing remission in
both UC and CD. Thiopurines reduce anti-drug antibody (ADA) formation against IFX and improve IFX trough drug
levels.
Statement 5b (AZA with adalimumab: evidence not convincing)
Evidence for combining azathioprine with ADALIMUMAB is NOT convincing. Concomitant use of thiopurines with
vedolizumab and ustekinumab is NOT currently recommended outside of exceptional circumstances.

-- 87 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 88
Statement 5c (Stopping IFX while continuing thiopurines: high relapse)
In patients on combination IFX + thiopurine who achieve corticosteroid-free remission for 6–12 months: withdrawal
of one agent may be considered. If IFX is STOPPED while continuing thiopurines: high cumulative relapse rates are
expected. If IFX is stopped, complete mucosal healing at time of IFX withdrawal is associated with lower relapse
risk.
Statement 1 Pregnancy (Continuation safe and recommended)
Continuation of pre-conception thiopurine therapy for maintaining remission during PREGNANCY is SAFE and
RECOMMENDED. Meta-analyses show no increase in low birth weight or congenital anomalies attributable to
thiopurines. Risk of preterm birth: slightly increased, likely related to underlying disease activity.
Pregnancy: thiopurine + biologic combination
Infants born to mothers on combination thiopurines + biologics are at increased risk of infections in the first year of
life. Consider cessation of one agent (usually thiopurines) in the combination during pregnancy to reduce infant
infection risk, balanced against maternal disease control.
Statement 2 Lactation (Breastfeeding allowed on AZA)
Breastfeeding is ALLOWED on azathioprine maintenance therapy. Meta-analyses show no increased risk of
infections in infants breastfed by mothers on thiopurines. Thiopurines concentrate in breast milk during the first 4
hours after drug intake — advise patients to BREASTFEED at least 4 hours after drug ingestion to reduce infant
exposure.
NUDT15 hypermethylator: low-dose thiopurine + allopurinol
A 6-MMPR:6-TGN ratio >11 indicates a thiopurine hypermethylator phenotype — these patients preferentially
produce hepatotoxic 6-MMP metabolites rather than therapeutic 6-TGN. Management: switch to low-dose thiopurine
+ allopurinol combination to shift metabolite ratio towards 6-TGN.
Demographics and risk: gender and age considerations
Males are at increased risk of lymphoma with thiopurines. HSTCL and EBV-related T-cell lymphoma are more
common in young adults. Thiopurine-induced pancreatitis is more common in FEMALES. Factor patient
demographics (age, sex, EBV status) into the benefit-risk assessment when prescribing thiopurines.
Social history before thiopurine: alcohol and smoking
Obtain a detailed social history before initiating thiopurine therapy. Concomitant ALCOHOL ABUSE increases
hepatotoxicity risk with thiopurines. SMOKING is associated with thiopurine-induced pancreatitis. Patients with these
risk factors require closer monitoring and counselling.
COVID-19 and thiopurines (continued use appropriate)
Continuation of thiopurines does not appear to increase COVID-19 severity or risk of poor outcomes.
Thiopurine-mediated cytokine suppression may in fact be beneficial for pulmonary complications of COVID-19.
Thiopurines should not be routinely discontinued during COVID-19 infection unless there is severe systemic illness.
Statement 1
The efficacy and safety of thiopurines depend on several factors. Recognition of patient demographics is important.
Increasing age is associated with increased risk of adverse effects including infections and malignancies. Certain
malignancies such as hepatosplenic T cell lymphoma (HSTCL) and systemic Epstein-Barr virus (EBV; infectious
mononucleosis) related T cell lymphoma are more common in young adults. While males are at an increased risk of
developing lymphoma; other adverse effects, pancreatitis in particular, are more common in females. Concomitant
alcohol abuse increases the probability of hepatotoxicity whereas smoking is associated with pancreatitis. Elaborate
clinical history and examination and laboratory evaluation (complete blood count [CBC], liver function tests, renal
function tests, and blood glucose) for as-

-- 88 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 89
Statement 2
The efficacy and safety of all thiopurine agents (AZA, 6-MP, and 6-TG) is similar and the choice of agent depends on
local prescribing preferences, physician and patient preference, availability and financial implications. The majority
of physicians in India use AZA.23,28 A designer thiopurine analogue; B-0N, has also been developed using rational
drug design.49 It mediates earlier and stronger induction of T cell apoptosis compared to 6-MP and is associated
with fewer adverse effects in vitro, however further studies consolidating these
Statement 4
nCombination Therapy of Thiopurines and Anti-TNF Agents Combination therapy of thiopurines has been
extensively
Statement 1
Leucopenia Myelosuppression is the commonest (2%–12%) dose-dependent adverse effect and the most common
cause of drug discontinuation. The presentation is usually with leucopenia, although other cell lines may also be
suppressed in conjunction (anemia, thrombocytopenia). A decline in leukocyte count within 1–2 weeks of therapy
may be a marker of impending leucopenia. Although myelosuppression can occur at any time, severe
myelosuppression is less frequent after the first 8 weeks of therapy. The TPMT and NUDT15 variants are associated
with increased risk of leucopenia. As discussed earlier, the frequency
Statement 2
Hepatotoxicity The spectrum of thiopurine-induced liver injury includes hypersensitivity reaction (acute hepatitis),
cholestasis (mixed or bland) and endothelial injury (veno-occlusive disease, peliosis hepatis and nodular
regenerative hyperplasia). While hypersensitivity and cholestasis are idiosyncratic reactions, occurring early; injury
mediated by endothelial cell damage is considered to be dose-dependent and a late event.72 The most common
form of thiopurine-induced liver injury is transient asymptomatic elevation of liver enzymes, which requires
continuation of therapy with close monitoring. At times persistently rising liver enzymes warrant dose reduction
and/or discontinuation of therapy.73 Split-dosing and LDTA are other possible strategies to overcome asymptomatic
TPMT-related elevation of liver enzymes. The acute cholestatic injury due to AZA usually presents with fatigue and
jaundice, pruritis is uncommon. Cholestatic hepatic injury usually resolves on stopping the drug, but rarely it can be
prolonged or culminate into vanishing bile duct syndrome.74 Endothelial injury to liver manifests as fatigue with
signs and symptoms of hepatic parenchymal injury and portal hypertension. In cases of veno-occlusive disease an
acute presentation with abdominal pain and ascites can be seen. Bio-
Statement 3
Acute Pancreatitis Acute pancreatitis is an idiosyncratic complication reported in about 3% of patients. The episodes
are usually mild; female sex and smoking being the probable risk factors.76,77 6-MP should not be used in patients
with AZA-induced pancreatitis. However, 6-TG (at doses of 20–40 mg) maybe a safer alternative to AZA/6-MP for
patients who are at high risk of AZA/6MP induced acute pancreatitis.78
Statement 4
Gastrointestinal Intolerance Nausea, vomiting and, rarely, diarrhea and pain abdomen are side effects of thiopurines
encountered during initial few weeks. These are usually self-limiting. Successful shifting from AZA to 6-MP or 6-TG
in such patients has been reported.79

-- 89 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 90
Statement 5
Infections Immunosuppressive actions of thiopurines affect both innate and acquired immune systems, thus
increasing the risk of opportunistic as well as non-opportunistic infections. Concomitant use of other
immunosuppressive drugs further accentuates the risk.80 The risk of opportunistic infections was markedly
increased if thiopurines were used in combination with systemic steroids as compared to monotherapy with
thiopurines (odds ratio [OR],17.5; 95% CI, 4.5–68 and OR, 3.8; 95% CI, 2.0–7.0, respectively).81 A meta-analysis
showed that the combination of thiopurine and anti-TNF therapy increased the risk of serious infections compared to
monotherapy with thiopurines (hazard ratio, 2.11; 95% CI, 1.80–2.48).80 Serious infections mainly involved the
respiratory tract, gastrointestinal tract, and skin. Opportunistic infections with viruses (varicella, cytomegalovirus,
EBV, etc.), bacteria and mycobacteria have been encountered with increased frequency with use of thiopurines.80
Pre-therapy screening for HBV, HCV, HIV, varicella and tuberculosis is therefore recommended.82 Patients should
be sensitized to seek help promptly in case of fever or suspected infection to ensure early detection, diagnosis and
treat-
Statement 1
Pregnancy Thiopurines, being teratogenic in animals (previously labelled as Food and Drug Administration [FDA]
class D), are of concern for their use in pregnancy and lactation. AZA crosses placenta and its metabolites are
present in fetal RBCs. Meta-analyses have found no increase in the risk of low birth weight or congenital anomalies
with use of thiopurines in pregnancy; however the risk of preterm birth was higher.90,91 The risk of preterm birth
was proposed to be associated with IBD activity rather than thiopurines in a large Swedish registry.92 Therefore,
continuation of pre-conception therapy with thiopurines for maintaining remission during pregnancy is safe and
recommended. Infants born to mothers receiving thiopurines in combination with biologics have an increased risk of
infections and cessation of one of the 2 drugs, usually thiopurines, should be considered.92 Also LDTA should not
be used because of teratogenic risks of allopurinol. Initiating thiopurines for the first time in pregnancy is not
recommended due to uncertainty of complications and delayed therapeutic response.72
Statement 2
Lactation Assessment of long-term outcomes in babies born to mothers taking AZA during pregnancy or lactation
showed no increased risk of infections. Therefore, breast feeding can be allowed during maintenance therapy with
AZA. The major part of thiopurines in breast milk is excreted within the first 4 hours after drug intake and the
maximum exposure of the drug to the infant is less than 1% of the maternal dose. Therefore the lactating mother
should breastfeed at least 4 hours after the drug ingestion to reduce the infant’s drug exposure. The practice of
“pumping and dumping” 4 hours breast milk is neither necessary nor likely to be effective and should be
discouraged.93
Statement 3
The number of elderly with IBD is increasing worldwide due to longevity of survival of patients with adult-onset IBD
or due to development of elderly-onset IBD. Among the elderly IBD patients, UC (E2 > E3) is more common than CD
(colonic > ileal). Thiopurines, when used for maintenance of remission in elderly, are well tolerated and have been
shown to be as efficacious as in younger IBD patients. However, associated comorbidities limit their use (drug-drug
interactions). Elderly patients are also at an increased risk of adverse effects, including infections, and malignancies.
Therefore, the long-term use of thiopurines in elderly should be considered carefully, weigh ing risks versus
benefits.94

-- 90 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 91
Statement 4
Children The Paediatric IBD Porto Group of European Society for Paediatric Gastroenterology Hepatology and
Nutrition has differentiated pediatric IBD into 5 categories: typical UC, atypical UC, IBD-unclassified (IBDU), Crohn’s
colitis, and CD.95 While pancolitis is the predominant phenotype for UC, inflammatory ileo-colonic disease is the
commonest presentation in CD. Pediatric-onset IBDU is twice as common as adult-onset disease. Prolonged
maintenance of corticosteroid-free remission and mucosal healing aids in improved growth in children with IBD.
Clinical remission in pediatric IBD can be maintained with 5-ASA, thiopurines or biologics. Use of thiopurines is
associated with decreased rates of hospitalization, corticosteroid use, and surgery in both UC and CD; but they are
reserved as a second line therapy in children due to unfavorable safety profile. Adverse effects may occur in
15%–28% of pediatric IBD patients, and up to 18% may require discontinuation of therapy due to the same. In
addition, there is an increased risk of infections, HSTCL, EBV positive mononucleosis associated T cell lymphoma
and NMSC in young patients. Therefore, thiopurines should be used with caution with regular moni-
Statement 5
COVID-19 During the current pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), continuation of thiopurines and
other immunosuppressive agents which can theoretically increase the risk of infections is a major concern. However,
the currently available evidence does not suggest increased risk of COVID-19 in patients with IBD as compared to
non-IBD patients.99 It is noteworthy that COVID-19 disease severity is characterized by increased levels of various
cytokines (interleukins [IL-2, IL-6, IL7], granulocyte-colony stimulating factor, TNF-α, etc.).100 This cytokine storm in
COVID-19 resembles the cytokine profile of inflamed intestine in IBD. Hence, suppression of cytokines by
thiopurines may in fact be beneficial for pulmonary complications. Also, as thiopurines act by incorporating into
DNA/RNA
Statement 6
nVaccination for Patients with IBD Receiving Thiopurines As there is an increased risk of infections in patients on
thiopurines, vaccination is recommended for all patients with IBD prior to initiation of immunosuppression (Tables 1,
2). Live
Statement 1
Thiopurines are effective for maintenance of remission for CD and UC.
Statement 2
An elaborate clinical workup is required for initiating and monitoring therapy with thiopurines.
Statement 3
Screening for infections like HBV, HCV, VZV, and EBV is recommended.
Statement 4
nDaily doses of AZA, 6-MP and 6-TG are 2–3 mg/kg, 1–1.5 mg/kg, and 0.2–0.3 mg/kg respectively. Lower doses of
AZA ( < 2 mg/kg/day) are effective in Asians. Combination of low dose thiopurines and allopurinol can be used in
patients who are hypermethylators with 6-MMPR: 6-TGN ratio > 11. Genetic testing for polymorphisms in TPMT and
NUDT15 can guide about the starting dose and predict dose-dependent adverse effects.
Statement 5
nCombination of thiopurines with IFX is superior to either therapy alone in inducing remission in both UC and CD.
Thiopurines decrease the formation of anti-drug antibodies and thereby improve the clinical efficacy of IFX. Evidence
for combining AZA with adalimumab is not convincing. Concomitant use of thiopurines with vedolizumab and
ustekinumab is not recommended at the moment.

-- 91 of 92 --

IBD Clinical Knowledge Rulebook — AI Training Edition Page 92
Statement 6
nThiopurines have a narrow therapeutic window, therefore monitoring of treatment is required for optimization of
therapy and prevent adverse effects. 6-TGN and 6-MMPR are the 2 metabolites measured in clinical practice to
guide therapy. Mean corpuscular volume may be considered a surrogate marker for thiopurine metabolites where
drug metabolite levels are not available/affordable.
Statement 7
nThiopurine use is associated with development of both idiosyncratic and dose-dependent adverse effects.
Idiosyncratic adverse effects include fatigue, flu like illness, myalgias, gastrointestinal intolerance, headache, and
pancreatitis whereas leucopenia, myelosuppression and hepatotoxicity are dose-dependent adverse effects.
Statement 8
nThiopurines carry a risk of development of malignancy. Lymphoma (non-Hodgkin lymphoma, NHL) is the
commonest malignancy, usually seen in elderly patients receiving thiopurines. The risk decreases gradually after
withdrawal of therapy. Hepatosplenic T cell lymphoma is a peripheral T cell lymphoma that occurs in young males
receiving combination therapy with thiopurines and anti-TNF agents for ≥ 2 years. Thiopurines increase the risk of
development of primary EBV infection (especially in seronegative patients) which can progress to an aggressive and
fatal lymphoma. Thiopurines should therefore be avoided in EBV seronegative patients. There is also an increased
risk of nonmelanoma skin cancer and uterine cervical cancer.
Statement 9
nPregnancy in patients with IBD should be planned when the disease is in clinical remission. Thiopurines can be
continued during pregnancy and lactation.
Statement 10
nThiopurine use in elderly ( ≥ 60 years) is associated with increased risk of adverse effects including infections and
malignancies and therefore should be used with caution.
Statement 11
Thiopurines can be continued in patients with IBD at risk for COVID-19.
Statement 12
Vaccination with live (except MMR) and inactivated vaccines is recommended. CD, Crohn’s disease; UC, ulcerative
colitis; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; VZV, varicella zoster virus; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; AZA,
azathioprine; 6-MP, 6-mercaptopurine; 6-TG, 6-thioguanine; 6-MMPR, 6-methyl mercaptopurine ribonucleotides;
6-TGN, 6-thioguanine nucleotides; TPMT, thiopurine-S-methyltransferase; NUDT15, nucleoside diphosphate-linked
moiety X-type motif 15; IFX, infliximab; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; COVID-19,
coronavirus disease 2019; MMR, measles mumps rubella.
Statement 1
GBD 2017 Inflammatory Bowel Disease Collaborators. The global, regional, and national burden of inflammatory
bowel disease in 195 countries and territories, 1990-2017: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease
Study

-- 92 of 92 --